   Variance-Corrected Multi-Asset Equity Simulation
        with Hybrid Hidden Markov Marginals


                                      Abdulrahman Alswaidan
               Robert Frederick Smith School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
                                 Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850
                                       aa2725@cornell.edu

                                          Jeffrey D. Varner∗
               Robert Frederick Smith School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
                                 Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850
                                        jdv27@cornell.edu



                                                Abstract
            Synthetic multi-asset equity data must reproduce each asset’s return distribution
            and its relationship with the market. Reusing a generator fitted to full asset returns
            creates a problem: adding its draws to a market factor counts market variance twice.
            We derived a correction that centers and rescales each draw over a fixed horizon
            before adding the market factor, allowing reuse without fitting a second generator
            to regression residuals. We tested the correction on 423 non-market assets in a
            424-asset United States equity and exchange-traded-fund universe, using hidden
            Markov generators with heavy-tailed emissions. The corrected paths retained
            heavy tails and recovered the calibrated market loadings with low error. On 416
            complete asset histories held out from 2025, the correction improved the mean
            Kolmogorov–Smirnov pass rate over naive composition and brought the median
            ratio of synthetic to observed variance close to one. Its one-day left-tail 99% Value-
            at-Risk exceedance rate was similar to that of the best residual-fit method, although
            both exceeded the nominal rate. We also tested a jump-duration mechanism that
            extended visits to extreme-return states and improved volatility clustering for the
            broad-market exchange-traded fund with ticker SPY. The multi-asset correction
            remained effective with jumps enabled, but transferring the SPY jump settings
            improved temporal fit in training and worsened it in the 2025 holdout. The method
            provides a way to reuse fitted asset generators for daily-fit comparisons. Its zero-
            sum residual constraint removes terminal residual uncertainty, and unmodeled
            dependence among asset-specific residuals can lead to overstated rebalancing
            returns. Code, cached inputs, result summaries, and instructions for fitting the
            per-asset models accompany the paper.


Keywords: hidden Markov model; jump-duration mechanism; single-index model; synthetic financial
data; variance correction; Value-at-Risk coverage check; volatility clustering; heavy-tailed marginals.




   ∗
       Corresponding author.


Preprint.
1   Introduction
Researchers and practitioners use synthetic equity paths to test risk models, evaluate portfolio
strategies, and examine market scenarios beyond those observed in a historical sample [1, 2]. A
multi-asset simulator must represent both the behavior of each asset and the relationships among
assets. Factor models provide a simple way to link many assets through a shared market path [3–5],
but using them with existing single-asset generators requires care. The single-index model separates
each asset’s return into a market component and an asset-specific residual, with the market loading
estimated by regression. A generator fitted to full asset returns already represents the asset’s total
variance. Adding its draws to the market component as though they were residuals adds market
variance a second time and can also shift the mean. Fitting another generator to each asset’s regression
residuals avoids that problem, but requires a second fit across the asset universe. Reusing the existing
generator would avoid that additional fit, provided its draws could be transformed to supply only
the residual contribution. The relevant question is whether that transformation can control the mean
and variance of the composed paths while retaining useful distributional and temporal behavior.
Dependence among the remaining residuals is a further requirement that a per-asset adjustment alone
cannot resolve.
The return features that a generator must capture are illustrated by daily excess growth rates for
the broad-market exchange-traded fund with ticker SPY from 2014–2024 (Fig. 1). Most returns lie
close to zero, but extreme returns occur much more often than a Gaussian model predicts (Fig. 1a,b),
a widely documented feature of financial returns [6, 7]. Raw growth rates show little correlation
across days, while absolute growth rates remain positively correlated over longer periods (Fig. 1c,d).
Large and small changes therefore cluster over time, so matching the return distribution alone does
not reproduce volatility dynamics. Synthetic financial data often miss these temporal properties
even when the return histogram appears realistic [8]. A hidden Markov model (HMM) offers an
interpretable way to represent both features: it draws returns from state-dependent distributions
and uses transitions between states to represent temporal behavior [9, 10]. Ordinary transitions can
leave extreme states too quickly to reproduce persistent volatility, motivating an explicit duration
mechanism [11]. Such a mechanism can improve an individual generator, but adding a shared
market path changes the distribution and temporal behavior of the composed returns. Preserving total
variance therefore does not by itself establish that the single-asset improvements survive composition.
Portfolio evaluation also requires dependence between assets, including relationships not explained
by the market factor [12, 13].
In this study, we developed a variance correction for combining independently fitted asset generators
with a shared market path (Fig. 4; Table 3). The correction centered and rescaled full-return draws
before adding the market component, avoiding a separate residual-generator fit. We used heavy-tailed
hidden Markov generators and first assessed their distributional and temporal fit on SPY, including a
jump-duration variant that extended visits to extreme-return states. We then evaluated composition on
423 non-market assets, initially with jumps disabled to isolate the variance correction, and compared
reuse with methods fitted directly to regression residuals. With all 2014–2024 fits held fixed, the
correction improved distributional fit over naive composition on 416 complete asset histories from
2025 and brought the median ratio of synthetic to observed variance close to one (Table 4). Per-asset
Value-at-Risk coverage checks tested whether that improvement also produced reliable tail thresholds
(Table 5). A separate comparison enabled jumps in the market alone or in both the market and asset
generators to test whether the SPY temporal benefit survived composition (Table 6). The correction
remained effective, but the transferred jump settings improved temporal fit in training and worsened
it in the holdout. The experiments established the value and limits of generator reuse while leaving
cross-asset residual dependence unresolved.

2   Related Work
Single-asset return models treat changing volatility, market regimes, and extreme moves in different
ways. Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) and generalized autoregressive condi-
tional heteroskedasticity (GARCH) models allow conditional variance to change over time [14, 15].
Even with Gaussian innovations, the changing variance can produce an unconditional return distribu-
tion with excess kurtosis. Heavy-tailed innovations can improve the tail fit when Gaussian GARCH
understates the frequency of extreme returns. Stochastic-volatility models make volatility a latent


                                                   2
process [16–18]. Jump-diffusion models add discontinuous price moves [19, 20], but a jump com-
ponent alone does not explain persistent volatility. Markov-switching ARCH and GARCH models
combine discrete regimes with changing conditional variance [21, 22]. Hidden-state models represent
returns with a small number of market regimes. In a hidden Markov model (HMM), each latent state
has a separate return distribution. Gaussian-emission HMMs can reproduce heavy tails and weak
raw-return autocorrelation, but may still miss volatility clustering [23, 10]. Hidden semi-Markov
models allow more flexible state durations and can improve volatility persistence [11]. An HMM
does not create a jump process by itself. Rare extreme moves must come from the state-dependent
return distributions or from a transition rule designed for such events. Deep generative models learn
return distributions and temporal features without specifying a small set of market regimes or a
parametric return process. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are one class of deep generative
model. Quant GANs have reproduced several financial time-series features, including volatility
clustering and leverage effects [24]. Sig-Wasserstein GANs use path signatures to learn features that
depend on the order of observations [25]. In contrast, evaluations of GAN paths, including paths
from the time-series generative adversarial network (TimeGAN), have found too little autocorrelation
in absolute returns [26–28]. The conflicting results show that flexible architectures do not guarantee
a match to financial stylized facts. Model design, training, and evaluation all matter [1, 8].
Multi-asset generation also requires a model of cross-asset dependence. Multivariate GARCH models
estimate time-varying covariance matrices. The dynamic conditional correlation model reduces the
number of parameters by separating individual volatility models from correlation dynamics [29, 30].
Copulas separate each asset’s return distribution from the dependence model. Dynamic copulas allow
cross-asset dependence to change over time, while vine copulas provide flexible high-dimensional
constructions [31, 32]. Factor models reduce dimension by linking each asset to a small number of
shared factors [3–5]. Shared-state HMMs and multivariate GANs can also generate joint market
moves [33, 34]. A standard factor model can resample historical residuals or fit a separate residual
generator for every asset. This paper addresses a narrower problem. We start with single-asset
generators already fitted to full returns and ask whether they can be reused in a factor model. The
relevant comparison is with methods fitted directly to regression residuals: those methods remove
the market component before fitting, whereas reuse adjusts an existing full-return draw during
composition. Neither approach specifies cross-asset residual dependence unless that dependence is
modeled separately.

3     Methods
We fitted a marginal generator for each asset and combined the generated paths with a variance-
corrected single-index model. The dataset contained 424 United States-listed equities and exchange-
traded funds observed from 2014 through 2024. The single-asset analysis focused on the broad-market
exchange-traded fund with ticker SPY. It used 2,767 daily volume-weighted average prices for fitting,
which yielded 2,766 growth rates, and the next 250 prices from 2025, which yielded 249 holdout
growth rates. The multi-asset analysis used daily closing prices. Of the 423 non-market assets in
the training universe, 416 had complete 2025 histories and were included in the multi-asset holdout
evaluation. We defined the excess growth rate Gi,j for ticker i between trading days j − 1 and j from
prices Pi,j−1 and Pi,j .                                  
                                           1           Pi,j
                               Gi,j ≡           ln               − rf .                            (1)
                                          ∆t         Pi,j−1
Here, ∆t = 1/252 is the fraction of a trading year spanned by one trading day, and rf is a constant
continuously compounded risk-free rate. We used rf = 0.043 for the SPY training period and
rf = 0.0421 for its 2025 holdout, based on Treasury Separate Trading of Registered Interest and
Principal of Securities (STRIPS) bond yields. For the multi-asset closing-price experiments, we set
rf = 0 in both windows, so their growth rates were annualized log returns. The excess growth rate
has units of year−1 and is time-additive under continuous compounding.

3.1   Per-asset hidden Markov marginal generator

For each asset, the hidden Markov model with jumps (HMM-WJ) converted the continuous return
series into a sequence of N ordered return regimes. At each time step, the model first selected a
regime and then drew a return from that regime’s distribution (Fig. 2). We represented the model as


                                                  3
M = (S, O, T, E, π̄) [9]. The hidden state St ∈ S = {1, . . . , N } identifies the regime at time t,
and the observed value is the excess growth rate Gt from Eq. (1). We omit the ticker index i when
discussing one asset. The transition matrix T sets the probabilities of moving between regimes, E
gives the return distribution within each regime, and π̄ gives the initial regime probabilities. We
ordered the regimes from the most negative to the most positive returns. Their boundaries were
equally spaced quantiles of a Laplace distribution fitted to the asset’s in-sample returns. Specifically,
Qk = FL−1 (k/N ; µL , bL ), where µL and bL are the fitted location and scale. We set Q0 = −∞ and
QN = +∞ and assigned return Gt to state k when Qk−1 < Gt ≤ Qk . The Laplace distribution
captured the sharp concentration of small price movements in Fig. 1a [35, 36]. We computed its
closed-form quantiles for all 424 tickers [37].
The within-state emission followed a location-scale Student-t distribution.
                              Gt | St = k ∼ µk + σk · tν ,         ν = 5,                            (2)
where tν denotes a standard Student-t random variable with ν degrees of freedom. For observations
assigned to state k, µk is the sample mean and σk is the sample standard deviation. A standard tν
has variance ν/(ν − 2), so σk is a scale parameterp rather than the emission standard deviation. At
ν = 5, the emission standard deviation is σk 5/3. We selected ν = 5 from a sensitivity sweep.
We used ν = ∞ for the Normal baseline; Table 1 gives the explored range. Holding the rest of
the model fixed, the Student-t emission raised simulated kurtosis toward the observed value and
raised the Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) and Anderson–Darling (AD) pass rates relative to the Normal
emission. We also compared HMM-WJ with a hidden semi-Markov model (HSMM) baseline adapted
from Bulla and Bulla [11] (Table S4; Online Appendix S6). The emission and HSMM comparisons
separated the effects of heavy-tailed emissions and the jump-duration mechanism. We estimated the
transition matrix T by counting observed transitions, which avoided the initialization sensitivity of
iterative expectation-maximization [37]. The counted matrix was concentrated near its diagonal, but
individual states, including tail states, were short-lived (Fig. S3 in Online Appendix S5). The counted
transition probabilities caused the model to leave extreme-return states too quickly to reproduce
the observed volatility clustering [11]: a chain fitted by counting reproduces the one-step state-pair
frequencies exactly, and its absolute-return autocorrelation therefore decays geometrically at a rate
set by the counted matrix. Online Appendix S4 derives the fitted generator’s stationary law and
autocorrelation structure and quantifies both this rapid mixing and the correction added by the jump
mechanism.
We added jump episodes to extend visits to extreme-return states. When no jump episode was active,
a new episode began with probability ϵ. Its duration was K ∼ Poisson(λ), where λ is the mean
episode length [38]. Because a Poisson draw can be zero, K = 0 caused no forced tail step. For
K > 0, the model temporarily replaced ordinary transitions with draws from two tail sets. The
set S− = {1, . . . , Ntail } contained the most negative states, and S+ = {N − Ntail + 1, . . . , N }
contained the most positive states. At each forced step, the model selected the negative set with
probability pneg and the positive set otherwise. It made the tail-set choice independently at each step,
so negative extreme returns occurred slightly more often than positive ones. Table 1 lists ϵ, λ, pneg ,
and Ntail . Two closed-form quantities summarize the mechanism’s operating point: forced steps
occupy a long-run fraction of approximately ϵλ/(1 + ϵλ) of all steps, and a path of T steps contains
at least one episode with probability approximately 1 − e−ϵT , so ϵ sets how many paths jump while
λ sets how long an episode P   lasts (Online Appendix S4). We obtained the initial-state distribution
π̄ by solving π̄T = π̄ with k π̄k = 1 [39, 40]. Because T was estimated by counting, π̄ equals
the vector of in-sample state frequencies up to end effects, so the model’s stationary growth-rate
distribution is the frequency-weighted mixture of the state emission distributions. The solved π̄
is exact for the ordinary transition matrix but only approximate for the jump-augmented process
because it does not include the remaining jump duration. The full simulation procedure appears in
Algorithm 1. Each step followed T or continued a jump episode and then drew a return from the
selected state’s emission distribution.
We chose the jump probability ϵ and mean duration λ to match the SPY absolute-return autocorrelation
and kurtosis [6, 7, 10]. Jump-diffusion models use Poisson events to add instantaneous price
jumps [19, 20]. In HMM-WJ, a jump episode extended a visit to the tail states. We searched a grid of
(ϵ, λ) values. At each grid point, we averaged squared errors in the autocorrelation function (ACF) of




                                                   4
Algorithm 1 Hidden Markov model with jumps (HMM-WJ) single-asset marginal generator.
Require: Fitted parameters (T, E, π̄, ϵ, λ, pneg , Ntail ); horizon T ; tail sets S− = {1, . . . , Ntail } and
    S+ = {N − Ntail + 1, . . . , N }.
Ensure: State sequence {St }Tt=1 and growth-rate path {Gt }Tt=1 .
 1: Draw S1 ∼ π̄; draw G1 ∼ µS1 + σS1 t5 ; k ← 0 {stationary start; k: remaining forced-step
    counter}
 2: for t = 2, . . . , T do
 3:   if k > 0 then
 4:      J ← S− w.p. pneg , else S+ ; St ∼ Uniform(J ); k ← k − 1                   {forced tail step; sign
         drawn per step}
 5:   else if Uniform(0, 1) > ϵ then
 6:      St ∼ TSt−1 ,·                                                       {standard Markov transition}
 7:   else
 8:      K ∼ Poisson(λ)                                         {trigger jump; K is the episode length}
 9:      if K = 0 then
10:         St ∼ TSt−1 ,·                                 {K = 0: no forced steps, standard transition}
11:      else
12:         J ← S− w.p. pneg , else S+ ; St ∼ Uniform(J ); k ← min(K − 1, T − t)                         {first
            forced step; K steps total, sign per step}
13:      end if
14:   end if
15:   Draw Gt ∼ µSt + σSt t5                                                                        {Eq. (2)}
16: end for


absolute returns through lag L and weighted squared errors in excess kurtosis over the jump-active
paths. We minimized the objective J(ϵ, λ).
                                 " L                                                  #
                        1 X X                                   2                   2
           J(ϵ, λ) =                   (ACFobs (τ ) − ACFr (τ )) + wκ (κobs − κr ) ,           (3)
                      |RJ |       τ =1
                              r∈RJ

where RJ is the set of jump-active simulated paths, ACFobs (τ ) and κobs are the empirical absolute-
growth autocorrelation at lag τ and excess kurtosis, and ACFr (τ ) and κr are the corresponding
values for path r. We used κ for kurtosis and K for jump duration. We simulated 200 independent
paths of 2,766 trading days at each grid point. A path with no jump reduces to the hidden Markov
model with no jumps (HMM-NJ) and contains no information about (ϵ, λ), so the objective included
only paths with at least one jump [38]. Within those paths, λ controls both the height and the horizon
of the slow autocorrelation component while the kurtosis penalty limits the total forced-step mass;
ϵ acts mainly through the share of paths that contain an episode (Online Appendix S4). The value
of wκ set the relative weight of the kurtosis error. The search ranges, wκ , L, and the remaining
HMM-WJ and SIM hyperparameters are reported in Table 1. We fixed the selected hyperparameters
before running the generator comparisons and the holdout evaluation.

3.2   Variance-corrected multi-asset composition

The single-asset model generated each ticker separately and did not specify cross-asset dependence.
For the multi-asset model, we added a shared market path as a common factor. We used the single-
index model (SIM) of Sharpe [3].
                         gi (t) = αi + βi gm (t) + εi (t),            t = 1, . . . , T.                    (4)
Here αi is the intercept for asset i, gm is the market growth-rate path, βi is the asset’s market loading,
and εi is its asset-specific residual path. We use εi for the residual path and ϵ for the jump probability
in the single-asset model. We estimated the intercept and market loading (αi , βi ) from real data
by ordinary least squares (OLS). The choice of εi determined the composition method. A standard
SIM draws independent Gaussian residuals with the variance estimated by OLS. These Gaussian
residuals preserve the fitted market relationship but do not retain the heavy tails and volatility regimes
produced by the single-asset generator. We called the Gaussian-residual method Gaussian SIM.



                                                      5
Naive full-path composition. In the naive construction, a full synthetic return path g̃i from the
single-asset generator served as the residual.
                                        gi = αi + βi gm + g̃i .                                     (5)
The fitted intercept and market term already set the conditional mean of asset i, while the full-return
draw generally has E[g̃i ] ̸= 0. Equation (5) therefore has conditional mean αi + E[g̃i ] + βi gm , not
αi + βi gm . We centered every full-return path before composition to remove the duplicate mean.
Centering subtracted the realized path mean.
                                            T
                                        1X
                               g̃ i ≡         g̃i (t),       g̃ic (t) ≡ g̃i (t) − g̃ i .                   (6)
                                        T t=1
Therefore, T −1 t g̃ic (t) = 0 exactly. Subtracting a constant leaves both the sample variance and the
                 P
sample covariance with gm unchanged. We used the centered construction gi = αi + βi gm + g̃ic as
the naive benchmark. This choice imposes a zero residual sum over the requested horizon, which is
stronger than a zero population mean. Scaling preserves that constraint in every hybrid branch. For
a fixed market path and effective loading, the terminal cumulative log return has no asset-specific
residual uncertainty, although daily and intermediate returns still vary. A clipped loading can vary
between draws and produce terminal variation through the market term. Because centering and
scaling use statistics of the entire draw, the construction depends on the chosen horizon. We therefore
evaluated it as a constrained finite-horizon construction for daily distributional fit and factor recovery;
it does not preserve cumulative residual uncertainty (Online Appendix S9).
                                                                            2
Centering corrected the mean but not the variance. The path variance σgen,i      = Var(g̃i ) = Var(g̃ic )
is the generator variance. It already represents the asset’s total variance. Adding the market term
therefore adds variance a second time. We sampled the residual and market paths independently.
Their covariance is zero in population and close to zero on a long realized path. We approximated the
naive composed variance accordingly.
                         Var(gi ) ≈ βi2 σm2     2
                                            + σgen,i ,     Cov(g̃ic , gm ) ≈ 0,                    (7)
         2
where σm   = Var(gm ) is the variance of the market path. The excess is βi2 σm
                                                                             2
                                                                               , so the error is largest
for assets with large market loadings.
                                      2
Variance correction. We set σgen,i         as the target total variance for asset i. The market term
contributed βi2 σm
                 2
                   , so the residual term could contribute only the remaining variance. We defined si as
the nonnegative asset-specific residual scale, set εi = si g̃ic , and required Var(βi gm + si g̃ic ) = σgen,i
                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                              .
Under the zero-covariance assumption, solving for si gives the correction.
                                                              βi2 σm
                                                                   2
                                                s2i = 1 −       2                                          (8)
                                                              σgen,i
The market loading ratio ρi is the market variance contribution divided by the target variance.
                                                 β 2 σ2
                                          ρi ≡ i2 m ,                                                      (9)
                                                  σgen,i
Under the zero-covariance assumption, ρi is the fraction of the target variance contributed by the
market, and s2i = 1 − ρi . At ρi = 1, the unconstrained rule leaves no asset-specific variance; for
ρi > 1, it has no real-valued solution. Values of ρi at or above one can arise when βi is large, the
generator variance is low, or the synthetic market is more volatile than the calibration market. We
required the asset-specific draw to contribute at least a fraction f of the target variance. We set
ρmax
 i    = 1 − f and reduced the effective loading βieff when ρi > ρmax i   . We applied the piecewise
correction in Eq. (10).
            
               β                           if ρi ≤ ρmax
             i                                     i
                                                                    (
                                                                       1 − ρi if ρi ≤ ρmax
            
     eff
                        s                                      2                         i
   βi =                             2
                                   σgen,i                     si  =                             (10)
                                                    max                                  max
            sign(βi ) (1 − f ) σ 2
            
                                          if ρi > ρi                  f        if ρi > ρi
                                      m
The correction retained the sign of the calibrated loading βi . We used f = 0.10, so the asset-
specific draw contributed at least 10% of the target variance for non-tracker assets (Table 1). Online
Appendix S9.1 examines the substitution of a full-return draw for the residual: it derives what the
construction preserves exactly and how the composed shape dilutes as ρi grows.


                                                         6
High-R2 index trackers. The non-tracker branch targeted total generator variance. For an index-
tracking fund, we instead targeted its fitted relationship with the market. The coefficient of deter-
mination R2 measures the fraction of the asset’s variance explained by the market. For example,
SPY regressed on itself has β = 1, R2 = 1, and no residual variance. QQQ and SPYG also had
high R2 against SPY. The non-tracker branch can change the fitted R2 even when it preserves total
                                                                 2                    2
variance. We therefore used a separate tracker branch when Ri,real     was at least Rpreserve . We set
  2
Rpreserve = 0.80, which separated the index trackers from individual stocks in our universe (Fig. S5).
For the tracker branch, we computed the residual variance required to recover the calibrated R2 under
the zero-covariance assumption.
                                                                2
                                    2
                                                          1 − Ri,real
                                   σε,target = βi2 σm
                                                    2
                                                      ·       2                                    (11)
                                                            Ri,real

We rescaled the generator draw to the target residual variance.
                                              s            !
                                                  2
                                                 σε,target
                                    εi =            2        g̃ic .                                (12)
                                                  σgen,i
         2
When Ri,real  = 1, the target residual variance is zero. SPY regressed on itself therefore has no
residual term. A scale factor greater than one increases the variance of the generator draw and can
weaken the original marginal fit.

Complete composition rule. The tracker branch targeted the calibrated R2 . The non-tracker branch
targeted the generator variance and reduced βi only when the market term would leave less than
the required asset-specific variance. After selecting a branch, we added the scaled asset draw to the
market term. The full procedure appears in Algorithm 2. If used, a residual-copula rank reorder was
applied jointly after scaling and before composition. The reorder preserved the empirical variance of
each residual path. Centering kept the path mean controlled by the intercept and market term. Under
the zero-covariance assumption, OLS estimates from longer composed paths converge to the effective
market loading and its intercept. The variance and loading properties are asymptotic. They do not
specify exact finite-sample values or the complete return distribution. Online Appendix S9 gives the
algebra. The construction links assets through same-day market returns. A simulated market episode
can therefore affect several assets together, but the rule does not separately fit lead–lag effects or a
joint volatility process.




                                                    7
Algorithm 2 Hybrid single-index model (SIM) composition with variance correction.
Require: Nonconstant gm , g̃i ∈ RT , i = 1, . . . , N ; each g̃i is independent of gm .
                                       2                                   2
Require: Parameters (αi , βi , Ri,real     ); floor f ∈ (0, 1); threshold Rpreserve ∈ (0, 1].
Ensure: Composed paths gi ∈ RT and branch flags bi .
      2
 1: σm    ← Var(gm ).
 2: for each asset i = 1, . . . , N do
          2
 3:     σgen,i   ← Var(g̃i ); g̃ic ← g̃i − g̃ i .
              2           2
 4:     if Ri,real ≥ Rpreserve     then
                    2 2            2        2
 5:         vi ← βi σm (1 − Ri,real      )/Ri,real .
                   q
                            2        eff
 6:         si ← vi /σgen,i      ; βi ← βi ; bi ← R 2- PRESERVE.
 7:     else
 8:         ρi ← βi2 σm 2     2
                           /σgen,i
 9:         if ρi ≤ 1√ − f then
10:             si ← 1 − ρi ; βieff ← βi ; bi ← VARIANCE.
11:         else
                       √                        q
12:             si ← f ; βieff ← sign(βi ) (1 − f )σgen,i  2
                                                                 /σm2 .

13:             bi ← CLIPPED.
14:         end if
15:     end if
16:     εi ← si g̃ic .
17: end for
18: Optional: jointly rank-reorder {εi }N      i=1 .
19: for each asset i = 1, . . . , N do
20:     gi ← αi + βieff gm + εi                                                                 {Eq. (4)}
21: end for


Evaluation protocol. We evaluated the method on 424 United States equities and exchange-traded
funds from Polygon.io. Each ticker had 2,767 daily closing prices from January 2014 through
December 2024, which yielded 2,766 growth rates. This complete-case selection conditioned the
analysis on assets that survived and retained data coverage throughout the training window. We
used SPY as the market and composed the other 423 assets. For each asset, we fitted the state and
emission model used in the SPY analysis (Table 1; rf = 0). In the primary six-method comparison,
we set the jump probability to zero to measure composition without per-ticker jump calibration.
                                                               2
We regressed each real asset on SPY to estimate αi , βi , Ri,real  , and residual variance. Across the
                                                2
sample, βi ranged from 0.03 to 1.79, and Ri,real ranged from 0.001 to 0.933 (Figs. S4 and S5). We
compared six ways to construct the asset-specific term (Table 3). The naive method used the centered
full-return draw without variance correction. The Gaussian SIM method used independent Gaussian
residuals with variance estimated by OLS. The corrected method, labeled hybrid in the tables and
figures, used Algorithm 2. The JumpHMM-on-residuals method fitted a new JumpHMM to the OLS
residual series after converting the residuals to a synthetic price path by cumulative compounding.
The block-bootstrap method sampled the√OLS residual series with the Politis–Romano stationary
bootstrap [41] and a mean block length of T ≈ 50. The GARCH(1,1)-t method fitted a conditional-
variance model to each residual series [15]. We required optimizer convergence, a finite likelihood,
finite coefficients, a positive variance intercept, nonnegative ARCH and GARCH coefficients whose
sum was below one, and Student-t degrees of freedom above two. Accepted fits also required finite
positive unconditional variance and a finite, nonconstant trial path. All 423 optimizations converged;
30 fits failed the stationarity condition, leaving 393 eligible training assets. The cached models
included per-ticker acceptance diagnostics, which were checked again before evaluation. For each
ticker, the naive and corrected methods received the same JumpHMM draw, which isolated the effect
of the variance correction. The other four methods generated their own residual draws. JumpHMM
names identify the generator implementation; its jump mechanism was disabled in both full-return
and residual fits for this six-method comparison. We did not use the optional cross-sectional rank
reorder because the experiment tested each ticker’s marginal construction separately. To isolate the
effect of the different mean constraints, we also compared each method’s native path with the same
path after subtracting its residual mean over the full training horizon (Table S14). We held the fitted
models, random draws, market path, effective loadings, and residual scales fixed. Naive and hybrid
paths already satisfied this constraint. The control used 100 replications per asset and the same 393


                                                           8
assets with available, simulatable cached GARCH models for all six methods. Online Appendix S11
gives the control definition and separates centering effects from model fitting.
We evaluated each composed series on factor recovery, distributional fit, and variance preservation.
For factor recovery, a new OLS regression produced the absolute errors |β̂ − β| and |R̂2 − Rreal  2
                                                                                                      |;
lower values indicate closer recovery. For distributional fit, we used Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) and
Anderson–Darling (AD) pass rates, Wasserstein-1 distance, excess kurtosis, and the Hill upper-tail
index. Higher KS and AD pass rates and lower Wasserstein distance indicate a closer match; kurtosis
and the Hill index describe tail behavior. For variance preservation, we used the composed-to-
generator variance ratio. A ratio of one indicates equal variances. Online Appendix S3 gives the
metric definitions. We ran 100 replications per ticker with seed 1234, producing 42,300 series for
each method except GARCH, which produced 39,300 series across its 393 eligible assets. Pass rates
used the significance level α = 0.05. For the six-method holdout evaluation, we froze all marginal fits,
residual models, and SIM parameters estimated from 2014–2024 (Tables 4 and 5). We evaluated the
methods against the 249 growth rates observed in 2025. Of the 423 non-market training assets, 416
had complete holdout histories; GARCH results covered 386 because its thirty non-stationary training
fits remained excluded (Table 4). For each replication, we generated a 249-day SPY path from the
training-period SPY marginal and used the same simulated market path in all asset compositions.
In this evaluation, the correction used the observed training-period market variance in place of the
                            2
simulated path variance σm     in Eqs. (8)–(12); the generator variance was still computed from each
asset draw. The residual scale therefore budgeted for the training market variance, and variation in
the simulated market variance could move the composed variance away from the generator target
even when the sample cross-covariance was zero. Observed 2025 SPY and asset returns were used
only for scoring. We repeated the KS, AD, Wasserstein-1, variance, kurtosis, and one-day left-tail
Value-at-Risk (VaR) evaluations with 100 paths per ticker. For each VaR threshold, we also used
Kupiec’s unconditional-coverage test to compare the observed number of exceedances with the
nominal rate [42]. Because goodness-of-fit tests have less power on 249 observations than on 2,766,
we also compared each synthetic path with a randomly selected contiguous 249-day block from the
training history. We first averaged replication-level results within ticker and then summarized across
tickers so each asset received equal weight. No 2025 data were used for fitting. The 249-day training
blocks provided a comparison at the same sample length as the holdout period.

Jump-enabled multi-asset comparison. To test whether the temporal benefit of the single-asset
jump mechanism survived composition, we compared three settings: jumps disabled, jumps enabled
only in the SPY market generator, and jumps enabled in both SPY and every asset generator (Table 6).
We froze the existing closing-price state models and SIM calibrations. Enabled models received the
SPY settings of Table 1, (ϵ, λ) = (10−4 , 90), pneg = 0.52, and Ntail = 5, without per-asset tuning.
The SPY calibration used volume-weighted average prices, so its transfer also changed the price
convention. We simulated the market in both the 2,766-day training comparison and the 249-day
holdout comparison; the preceding six-method training comparison instead used observed SPY. In
both windows of the jump comparison, the correction used each simulated market path’s variance and
each asset draw’s variance. Thus, the jump comparison also differed from the six-method holdout
protocol, which kept the market variance fixed at its training value. Within each experiment, the
variance convention was the same across all compared jump settings. This comparison assessed
whether the SPY settings improved the composed paths without recalibrating the individual asset
models. For each jump setting, naive and corrected composition received the same asset and market
draws (Table 6). One market path was shared across all assets in each replication. We generated 250
paths for each of four seeds (1234, 2345, 3456, and 4567), giving 1,000 replications per asset, setting,
and method. We measured absolute-return ACF-MAE over lags 1–25, with lags 1–60 as a secondary
check, and repeated the marginal and variance diagnostics. These common lag windows differ
from the single-asset comparison’s 252-lag score. We included all paths in the primary summaries
and estimated Monte Carlo uncertainty from replication-level cross-ticker averages, keeping assets
together under their shared market path. The intervals describe simulation uncertainty conditional on
the fitted models and observed histories, not uncertainty across market regimes.




                                                   9
4     Results
4.1   Single-asset generator validation

We first evaluated whether the asset generator captured the return distribution and volatility clustering
that motivated its use in composition (Figs. 1 and 2; Table S1). The observed SPY series had
heavy tails and persistent absolute-return autocorrelation in both the training and holdout windows.
Individual raw-return correlations were small, although the Ljung–Box test detected joint serial
dependence (Table S1). Calibration against the 2014–2024 history selected jump probability and
mean duration (ϵ, λ) = (10−4 , 90), with similar objective values at nearby grid points (Eq. (3);
Table 1; Algorithm 1). Ordinary states lasted only 1–2 steps, and the counted transition matrix
implied absolute-return autocorrelation that decayed to near zero within a week (Fig. S3). The
selected episodes extended visits to extreme states, providing a mechanism for more persistent
volatility. To assess whether the generator comparison depended on the state partition, we varied the
number of states (Table S7). The primary SPY analysis used N = 100 states, while sweeps from
N = 30 to 200 changed HMM-NJ pass rates by less than one percentage point (Table S7). The HMM-
WJ model showed a tradeoff as the partition changed: narrower states improved autocorrelation
accuracy but lowered the AD pass rate. At N = 350, some states were never visited and their
emission parameters could not be estimated (Online Appendix S7). The selected N = 100 lay within
the range that supported well-populated states for the 2,766-day history. That choice did not establish
an appropriate resolution for shorter histories, which would provide fewer observations per state.
The sensitivity checks therefore supported the fitted generator at the observed sample length without
establishing one state count for every asset history.
We compared the calibrated HMM-WJ with seven alternative generators using 1,000 paths of 2,766
trading days (Table 2; Fig. 3). The HMM-NJ and HMM-WJ models had KS pass rates of 99.3%
and 98.3%, respectively, compared with 98.4% for the fitted Laplace baseline. Both HMM variants
had lower Wasserstein-1 distances than Laplace, whereas Laplace had the lowest Hellinger distance
among the fitted generators (Table 2). The ranking therefore depended on the metric. Bootstrap
resampling had a 100% KS pass rate but did not reproduce volatility clustering, while Gaussian
sampling passed neither distribution test. The GARCH(1,1) model had the lowest mean absolute
error in the autocorrelation function (ACF-MAE), 0.031, but rarely passed the distribution tests. The
gated recurrent unit (GRU) [43] showed a similar tradeoff. The HSMM-style baseline adapted from
Bulla and Bulla [11] reached an 82% KS pass rate but underestimated kurtosis by more than one
third. Within the HMM, Student-t emissions produced kurtosis of 7.5, close to the observed 7.7,
whereas Normal emissions underestimated it by about 29% (Table S4). Both HMM variants also
reproduced the observed skewness of −0.75 through unequal occupancy of negative and positive
states (Table S1). The temporal comparison showed the cost of retaining that marginal fit. Jump
episodes improved temporal fit, with a small reduction in distributional pass rates (Table 2; Fig. 3b).
The HMM-WJ model reduced ACF-MAE from 0.059 for HMM-NJ to 0.053. About 24% of paths
contained an episode (Fig. S2); paths without an episode were equivalent to HMM-NJ. The episode
share, the fraction of forced steps, and the jump-path autocorrelation agreed with the calculations in
Online Appendix S4 (Tables S2 and S3). To examine the tradeoff, we resampled the fitted ensemble
with the fraction of jump-active paths ranging from zero to one. Increasing that fraction lowered
autocorrelation error but also lowered KS and AD pass rates. Kurtosis declined through the observed
value, while the Hill upper-tail index remained stable. The fitted ensemble retained approximately
one quarter jump-active paths, balancing kurtosis and autocorrelation error. To test whether the
distributional fit extended beyond calibration, we compared frozen-model paths with the 249 held-out
SPY returns from 2025. The HMM-NJ and HMM-WJ models retained KS pass rates of 96.6% and
95.4%, with kurtosis close to the observed value (Table 2; Fig. S2). The fitted Laplace baseline
had a KS pass rate of 96.7% and a lower Wasserstein-1 distance than either HMM variant, but its
excess kurtosis of 2.8 remained below the observed 6.9 (Table 2). Separate calibrations for NVDA,
JNJ, and JPM also showed strong training fit but more variable holdout performance (Table S10).
These findings supported the HMM as a source of heavy-tailed asset paths, while the benefit of the
jump mechanism depended on the metric and evaluation period. We used the no-jump variant for
the primary composition comparison and evaluated the transfer of jump settings separately in the
multi-asset jump comparison.




                                                   10
4.2   Variance-corrected multi-asset composition

We compared six composition methods across a training universe of 423 non-market assets, with
393 eligible for GARCH, to test whether the correction preserved generator variance and calibrated
market loading (Table 3). Naive composition inflated variance by adding the market term to a draw
that already represented total asset variance. The inflation increased with market exposure: at high
β, composed variance exceeded generator variance by roughly 30–60%, and the naive KS pass rate
fell toward zero above β ≈ 0.7. The corrected method kept the variance ratio near one and retained
substantially higher pass rates across the β range (Fig. 4). The cross-covariance omitted from the
variance calculation was small: its normalized universe mean was 1.53 × 10−4 , with per-ticker
values between −0.0061 and 0.0061 (Fig. S1). The diagnostic supported the approximation used to
derive the scale correction. The correction improved distributional fit while recovering the market
loading with accuracy similar to the other methods (Table 3). All six methods had median absolute β
errors between 0.017 and 0.022 (Table 3). Centering also kept the median absolute intercept error at
0.002 yr−1 for the naive and corrected methods; residual-fit methods retained finite-path variation in
their residual means. With observed training SPY and no loading adjustment, centered paths matched
the observed asset mean exactly. Their small intercept errors therefore reflected the imposed mean
constraint and finite-path loading error, rather than independent evidence of mean recovery.
The methods differed more in distributional fit than in factor recovery (Table 3; Fig. S6). Gaussian
SIM had the lowest median R2 error, but almost never passed the distribution tests and had excess
kurtosis an order of magnitude below the observed value. The corrected method passed 73.6% of KS
comparisons and retained heavy tails, with median excess kurtosis of 7.2 and a Hill index of 0.37
(Fig. S6). Its median R2 error fell between those of the naive and Gaussian methods because the
main correction targeted generator variance rather than observed R2 . Preserving variance therefore
improved the marginal fit without making every fitted property an exact target. Fitting directly to
regression residuals provided a competitive alternative because those residuals already excluded the
market component (Table 3). The three residual-fit methods had KS pass rates ranging from 67.4%
for GARCH(1,1)-t to 75.8% for JumpHMM-on-residuals (Table 3). The corrected rate was about two
percentage points below JumpHMM-on-residuals and slightly above block bootstrap. JumpHMM-on-
residuals and block bootstrap had slightly lower Wasserstein distances, while JumpHMM-on-residuals
matched the corrected method’s kurtosis and Hill index almost exactly. The block-bootstrap and
GARCH residual fits produced lighter tails. These comparisons used each method’s native mean
treatment, so their cross-method differences also included the effect of the zero-sum constraint.
Applying equivalent residual centering to all six methods changed the training ranking on the common
393-asset set (Table S14). Hybrid retained a 74.4% KS pass rate, while JumpHMM-on-residuals rose
from 75.8% to 78.4% and block bootstrap rose from 73.5% to 76.7%. Both residual-fit methods also
had higher AD pass rates and lower Wasserstein distances than hybrid after centering. Gaussian SIM
and GARCH remained below hybrid on both pass rates. After centering, all methods had median
intercept errors of 0.002 yr−1 at the reported precision, while leaving each path’s variance, recovered
loading, R2 , and excess kurtosis unchanged to numerical tolerance. Hybrid’s improvement over
naive composition persisted because both already used identical centering. Reuse therefore improved
on naive composition without a second generator fit, but did not match the strongest residual-fit
comparators under the common mean constraint. Held-out histories were needed to assess whether
the improvement over naive composition persisted beyond the fitting period.

4.3   Holdout performance and VaR coverage

To test out-of-sample generalization without refitting or look-ahead bias, we froze the fitted models
and SIM parameters before evaluating them against 416 complete asset histories from 2025 (Table 4).
The corrected method reached an 87.0% mean cross-ticker KS pass rate, against 83.5% for centered
naive composition, and its median composed-to-observed variance ratio was 0.97, whereas naive
composition remained inflated at 1.29. JumpHMM-on-residuals reached an 86.2% KS pass rate and a
slightly lower median W1 than the corrected method. Matched-length training blocks produced lower
pass rates for every method. The higher 2025 pass rates did not arise solely from comparing samples
of 249 rather than 2,766 observations. The average pass rates concealed substantial differences
among tickers (Fig. 5). Most ticker-level rates were near the upper end of the range, but every
method retained a lower tail of weak fits. For the corrected method, many tickers improved relative
to their matched-length training blocks, while a subset deteriorated out of sample. The held-out
marginal improvement was broad but did not ensure reliable extreme-loss thresholds. To test whether


                                                  11
marginal fit translated into reliable tail thresholds, we used the frozen synthetic paths to estimate
per-ticker one-day left-tail Value-at-Risk (VaR) thresholds and counted exceedances on the real 2025
histories (Table 5). At α = 0.95, the corrected and JumpHMM-on-residuals methods produced mean
exceedance rates of 5.97% and 6.07%, respectively, against the 5% nominal rate. At α = 0.99, both
rates were 1.67%, against the 1% nominal rate. Naive composition was closest at the 99% level
(1.21%), while Gaussian SIM had the largest exceedance rate (2.03%). The short holdout contained
only about 2–3 expected 99% exceedances per ticker, so we interpreted the corresponding Kupiec
pass rates and cross-ticker dispersion as low-power checks rather than precise rankings. The corrected
method improved marginal fit over naive composition, but its tail thresholds still produced more
exceedances than the nominal rates. The coverage results therefore limited the risk interpretation of
the distributional improvement.

4.4   Jump-enabled multi-asset composition

To test whether jump episodes improved the composed paths, we compared jumps disabled, market-
only jumps, and market-plus-asset jumps under naive and corrected composition (Table 6). With
corrected composition, market-only jumps reduced the training absolute-return ACF-MAE over lags
1–25 from 0.13569 to 0.12844, a 5.3% reduction. The KS pass rate changed from 73.94% to 73.64%,
with a Monte Carlo interval for the difference that included zero (Table S12). Enabling jumps in
both the market and asset generators reduced the ACF-MAE further, to 0.11581, a 14.6% reduction
from the no-jump setting, but lowered the KS pass rate to 61.68%. Across all settings and both
windows, the mean ratio of corrected to generator variance differed from one by less than 0.05%.
The correction remained effective, while asset episodes reduced training autocorrelation error at the
cost of marginal fit. The training-period temporal improvement did not carry into the 2025 holdout
(Table 6). With corrected composition, market-only jumps raised the 25-lag ACF-MAE from 0.07330
to 0.07525, a 2.7% increase, while market-plus-asset jumps raised it to 0.07832, a 6.9% increase
(Table 6). The corresponding KS pass rates were 85.92%, 85.88%, and 84.43%. The Monte Carlo
intervals excluded zero for both increases in ACF error, and the 60-lag results agreed (Table S12).
The jump-active market paths represented only 2.2% of the simulated one-year ensemble (Table S13),
so the holdout comparison tested the fitted mixture of ordinary and jump-active paths. The correction
worked with jumps enabled, but the transferred SPY settings did not improve temporal fit in 2025.
The short holdout and low episode frequency limited what the comparison could establish about
behavior in other market periods.

4.5   Sensitivity analyses

We examined the tracker and clipping rules under conditions where they could affect the result
(Figs. S4 and S5; Table S5). In the observed universe, 421 assets used the variance-preserving branch
and two, QQQ and SPYG, used the R2 -preserving branch; none required clipping (Figs. S5 and S4;
Table S5). Both trackers had 100% KS pass rates, while the highest-R2 individual stock, BLK, fell
about 0.16 below the tracker threshold of 0.80. Because only two assets used that branch, we tested a
                                      2
synthetic-tracker grid with (βtrue , Rtrue ) ∈ {0.8, 1.0, 1.2}×{0.80, 0.85, 0.90, 0.95, 0.99}. Each cell
had a 100% KS pass rate and recovered its target loading and R2 (Table S6). These checks supported
the tracker rule across the tested grid, while its empirical evaluation remained limited to two assets.
Greater market exposure made the composed distribution more dependent on the market path (Fig. 4b;
Table S8). Grouping assets by β quartile showed that corrected KS pass rates fell from 87.6% in
the lowest quartile to 65.9% in the highest (Table S8). To test the loading adjustment directly, we
multiplied the market growth-rate path by γ ∈ {1, 2, 3} while holding the calibrated marginals fixed
(Table S9). At γ = 1, every asset had ρi < 1 − f = 0.90, so clipping was unnecessary. At γ = 2
and 3, clipping applied to 76.4% and 95.2% of assets. The adjustment therefore activated as intended
when the market contribution would otherwise consume too much of the target variance. At observed
market variance, varying the residual floor f did not change branch assignments, and varying the
tracker threshold changed only the two tracker assignments (Table S5).

5     Discussion
The variance correction allowed fitted full-return generators to be reused in a single-index model
without adding market variance twice (Fig. 4; Table 3). Its practical value was avoiding a separate


                                                  12
generator fit for each asset’s regression residuals while improving on naive composition. The
corrected method passed 73.6% of the full-length training KS comparisons and retained heavy tails
(Table 3). On the 2025 holdout, it raised the mean cross-ticker KS pass rate from 83.5% under
centered naive composition to 87.0% and held the median ratio of synthetic to observed variance
at 0.97 (Table 4). JumpHMM-on-residuals had a slightly higher pass rate in training and a slightly
lower rate in the holdout. The comparison supported reuse as a practical option when full-return
generators are already available; fitting directly to residuals remained a competitive alternative. Under
equivalent centering on the common training assets, JumpHMM-on-residuals and block bootstrap
both outperformed hybrid on distribution-test pass rates and Wasserstein distance (Table S14). The
original comparison therefore partly reflected different mean constraints. Neither method was best for
every asset, and the average improvement concealed a subset of corrected paths whose fit deteriorated
relative to matched-length training blocks. The validation established closer marginal fit, but it did
not establish reliable tail coverage (Table 4; Table 5). The corrected method and JumpHMM-on-
residuals both had a one-day left-tail 99% VaR exceedance rate of 1.67%, above the nominal 1% rate
(Table 5). The 249-day holdout contained too few expected extreme events per asset for a precise
ranking. Distributional pass rates also require care because the two-sample KS and AD tests assume
independent observations, whereas several evaluated generators produced serial dependence. We
therefore interpreted pass rates alongside distributional distances, tail summaries, and autocorrelation
errors. Matched-length training blocks reduced the difference in test power between the training
and holdout comparisons, but the observed 2025 history still represented only one market period.
The evidence supported improved variance and distributional fit across the evaluated universe, with
substantial uncertainty about performance in other periods and for individual assets.
The jump comparison showed that improving the single-asset generator did not automatically improve
the composed paths (Table 2; Table 6). On SPY, HMM-WJ reduced absolute-return autocorrelation
error relative to HMM-NJ while retaining high distributional pass rates. Other generators achieved
lower autocorrelation error or higher pass rates, so the single-asset result supported a tradeoff between
temporal and marginal fit (Table 2). With multi-asset composition, market-only jumps improved
training temporal fit with little change in the KS pass rate, whereas adding asset-level episodes
produced a larger temporal improvement at a substantial marginal-fit cost. Both settings increased
autocorrelation error in 2025, although the variance correction remained effective (Table 6). These
tests transferred one SPY calibration from volume-weighted average prices to closing-price models.
Separate calibrations for NVDA, JNJ, and JPM had strong in-sample fit, but three assets did not
establish a general calibration rule (Table S10). The asset episodes also came from full-return models
and were not identified separately as idiosyncratic events. Per-asset tuning or distinct shared and
asset-specific episode models could change the tradeoff, but neither was tested here.
The correction’s effect on the return distribution depended on the asset’s market exposure (Fig. 4;
Table S8). Corrected KS pass rates declined from 87.6% in the lowest β quartile to 65.9% in the
highest because the market path accounted for more of the composed variance (Table S8). Preserving
total variance therefore did not preserve the complete shape of the original return distribution. The
loading adjustment was unnecessary at observed market variance but activated for most assets when
market volatility was doubled or tripled (Table S9). Only two tracker assets used the separate R2 -
preserving branch (Table S5), so evidence for that branch relied mainly on the synthetic-tracker
checks. These properties also depended on generating asset and market draws independently. If their
covariance were nonzero, the variance calculation would need an additional cross-term. The correction
thus addressed a specific composition problem, with explicit assumptions about the supplied paths
and adjustments when the market term consumed too much of the target variance. Dependence among
asset-specific residuals remained outside the composition rule (Algorithm 2; Online Appendix S2). A
shared market path linked same-day asset returns and could produce simultaneous large moves, but
independent residual draws omitted the sector and style dependence present in real assets. Omitting
positive residual covariance can overstate the diversification return from periodic rebalancing [44, 13,
45]; Online Appendix S2 derives the contribution for this construction. The limitation also applies
to the residual-fit baselines when their residuals are generated independently. Shifting paths leaves
cross-asset covariance unchanged, and rescaling independent residuals cannot create the missing
dependence. A synchronized multivariate block bootstrap, residual factor model, or copula could
address that omission, while separate univariate models would improve only within-asset behavior.
The present evaluation measured per-asset fit and VaR coverage, so it did not validate portfolio-level
risk or rebalancing performance. Those uses require a joint residual model and direct evaluation
of the resulting dependence. There is also a separate temporal limitation: per-path centering forces


                                                  13
each residual sum to zero at the chosen terminal horizon (Online Appendix S9). Conditional on
the market path and effective loading, terminal returns therefore contain no residual uncertainty.
Cross-sectional rank reordering preserves that sum and cannot restore cumulative residual variation.
The reported daily-fit and one-day tail diagnostics do not validate cumulative-return risk. Such
applications require a construction that retains cumulative residual uncertainty as well as validation
of cross-asset dependence.

6   Conclusion
We developed a variance-corrected single-index method that reuses full-return generators without
counting market variance twice (Fig. 4; Table 3). Centering and rescaling allowed the generated asset
paths to be combined with a shared market path without fitting a second generator to each asset’s
regression residuals. Across 423 non-market assets, the method recovered calibrated market loadings
with low error and retained heavy-tailed return distributions. On 416 complete asset histories from
2025, it improved the mean KS pass rate over centered naive composition and brought the median ratio
of synthetic to observed variance close to one (Table 4). Residual-fit methods remained competitive,
and neither the corrected method nor the best residual-fit alternative achieved nominal 99% VaR
coverage (Table 5). The results supported reuse of existing generators as a practical alternative
to fitting separate residual models, with validation still needed for each intended application. The
jump experiments established that the correction also worked when the generators included extended
episodes in extreme-return states (Table 6). The SPY jump settings improved multi-asset temporal fit
in training but worsened it in the 2025 holdout, showing that the single-asset benefit did not transfer
automatically. Correcting variance also left dependence among asset-specific residuals unresolved.
Independent residual draws omit relationships that matter for portfolio risk and can overstate the
return from rebalancing when positive residual covariance is missing. The composition rule therefore
provides one component of a multi-asset simulator: it controls how generator variance is combined
with the market factor, while portfolio-level applications require a joint residual model and validation
of both cross-asset dependence and temporal behavior. Per-path centering also removes terminal
residual uncertainty over the chosen horizon. The present evidence therefore supports the constrained
construction for daily-fit comparisons, while cumulative-risk applications require a method that
retains cumulative residual variation.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank the eCornell artificial intelligence (AI) in Finance program participants for discus-
sions that motivated this work, and Polygon.io for access to the 2014 to 2024 United States equity
and exchange-traded-fund daily price histories used in the experiments. Computations were run on a
single laptop; no shared-resource allocation was required.

Author contributions. A.A. designed the hybrid hidden Markov marginal generator, performed
the single-asset experiments and validation analyses, and contributed to the manuscript. J.D.V.
designed the variance-corrected single-index composition, performed the multi-asset experiments
and downstream Value-at-Risk validation, released the code, and contributed to the manuscript.

Competing interests.     The authors declare no competing interests.

Code and data availability. The experiment scripts, evaluation code (six-method comparison and
Value-at-Risk coverage check), cached inputs and result summaries, and instructions for regenerating
the fitted per-asset models are provided in the paper repository (https://github.com/varnerlab/
HMM-w-jumps-paper); the underlying model-fitting library is released separately as JumpHMM.jl
(https://github.com/varnerlab/JumpHMM.jl), pinned as a dependency of the experiment
code.

Generative artificial intelligence use. During the preparation of this work, the authors used
OpenAI Codex to assist with language editing, consistency checks, LaTeX formatting, and the
implementation and checking of experiment code. The authors reviewed and edited the assisted work
and take full responsibility for the content of the publication.


                                                  14
References
 [1] Samuel A. Assefa, Danial Dervovic, Mahmoud Mahfouz, Robert E. Tillman, Prashant Reddy,
     and Manuela Veloso. Generating synthetic data in finance: Opportunities, challenges and
     pitfalls. In Proceedings of the First ACM International Conference on AI in Finance, pages 1–8,
     2020. doi: 10.1145/3383455.3422554.
 [2] James Jordon, Lukasz Szpruch, Florimond Houssiau, Mirko Bottarelli, Giovanni Cherubin,
     Carsten Maple, Samuel N. Cohen, and Adrian Weller. Synthetic data: What, why and how?
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.03257, 2022.
 [3] William F. Sharpe. A simplified model for portfolio analysis. Management Science, 9(2):
     277–293, 1963. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.9.2.277.
 [4] Stephen A. Ross. The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing. Journal of Economic Theory, 13
     (3):341–360, 1976. doi: 10.1016/0022-0531(76)90046-6.
 [5] Eugene F. Fama and Kenneth R. French. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.
     Journal of Financial Economics, 33(1):3–56, 1993. doi: 10.1016/0304-405X(93)90023-5.
 [6] Benoit Mandelbrot. The variation of certain speculative prices. The Journal of Business, 36(4):
     394–419, 1963.
 [7] R. Cont. Empirical properties of asset returns: Stylized facts and statistical issues. Quantitative
     Finance, 1(2):223–236, 2001. doi: 10.1080/713665670.
 [8] Michael Stenger, André Bauer, Thomas Prantl, Robert Leppich, Nathaniel Hudson, Kyle Chard,
     Ian Foster, and Samuel Kounev. Thinking in categories: A survey on assessing the quality
     for time series synthesis. Journal of Data and Information Quality, 16(2):1–32, 2024. doi:
     10.1145/3666006.
 [9] L. Rabiner and B. Juang. An introduction to hidden Markov models. IEEE ASSP Magazine, 3
     (1):4–16, 1986. doi: 10.1109/MASSP.1986.1165342.
[10] Tobias Rydén, Timo Teräsvirta, and Stefan Åsbrink. Stylized facts of daily return series and
     the hidden Markov model. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 13(3):217–244, 1998. doi:
     10.1002/(SICI)1099-1255(199805/06)13:3<217::AID-JAE476>3.0.CO;2-V.
[11] Jan Bulla and Ingo Bulla. Stylized facts of financial time series and hidden semi-Markov models.
     Computational Statistics & Data Analysis, 51(4):2192–2209, 2006. doi: 10.1016/j.csda.2006.
     07.021.
[12] Paul Embrechts, Alexander J. McNeil, and Daniel Straumann. Correlation and dependence
     in risk management: Properties and pitfalls. In Risk Management: Value at Risk and Beyond,
     pages 176–223. Cambridge University Press, 2002. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511615337.008.
[13] Paul Bouchey, Vassilii Nemtchinov, and Ting-Kam Leonard Wong. Volatility harvesting in
     theory and practice. Journal of Wealth Management, 18(3):89–100, 2015. doi: 10.3905/jwm.
     2015.18.3.089.
[14] Robert F. Engle. Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with estimates of the variance of
     United Kingdom inflation. Econometrica, 50(4):987–1007, 1982.
[15] Tim Bollerslev. Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity. Journal of Econo-
     metrics, 31(3):307–327, 1986. doi: 10.1016/0304-4076(86)90063-1.
[16] Elias M. Stein and Jeremy C. Stein. Stock price distributions with stochastic volatility: An
     analytic approach. The Review of Financial Studies, 4(4):727–752, 1991.
[17] Steven L. Heston. A closed-form solution for options with stochastic volatility with applications
     to bond and currency options. The Review of Financial Studies, 6(2):327–343, 1993. doi:
     10.1093/rfs/6.2.327.
[18] Sangjoon Kim, Neil Shephard, and Siddhartha Chib. Stochastic volatility: Likelihood inference
     and comparison with ARCH models. The Review of Economic Studies, 65(3):361–393, 1998.


                                                  15
[19] Robert C. Merton. Option pricing when underlying stock returns are discontinuous. Journal of
     Financial Economics, 3(1-2):125–144, 1976. doi: 10.1016/0304-405X(76)90022-2.
[20] S. G. Kou. A jump-diffusion model for option pricing. Management Science, 48(8):1086–1101,
     2002. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.48.8.1086.166.
[21] James D. Hamilton and Raul Susmel. Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity and changes
     in regime. Journal of Econometrics, 64(1–2):307–333, 1994. doi: 10.1016/0304-4076(94)
     90067-1.
[22] Franc Klaassen. Improving GARCH volatility forecasts with regime-switching GARCH.
     Empirical Economics, 27(2):363–394, 2002. doi: 10.1007/s001810100100.
[23] James D. Hamilton. A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time series and
     the business cycle. Econometrica, 57(2):357–384, 1989. doi: 10.2307/1912559.
[24] Magnus Wiese, Robert Knobloch, Ralf Korn, and Peter Kretschmer. Quant GANs: Deep
     generation of financial time series. Quantitative Finance, 20(9):1419–1440, 2020. doi: 10.
     1080/14697688.2020.1730426.
[25] Hao Ni, Lukasz Szpruch, Marc Sabate-Vidales, Baoren Xiao, Magnus Wiese, and Shujian
     Liao. Sig-wasserstein GANs for time series generation. In Proceedings of the Second ACM
     International Conference on AI in Finance, pages 1–8. ACM, 2021. doi: 10.1145/3490354.
     3494393.
[26] Shuntaro Takahashi, Yu Chen, and Kumiko Tanaka-Ishii. Modeling financial time-series with
     generative adversarial networks. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications, 527:
     121261, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.physa.2019.121261.
[27] Jinsung Yoon, Daniel Jarrett, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Time-series generative adversarial
     networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, pages 5509–5519,
     2019.
[28] Sohyeon Kwon and Yongjae Lee. Can GANs learn the stylized facts of financial time series? In
     Proceedings of the 5th ACM International Conference on AI in Finance, pages 126–133, 2024.
     doi: 10.1145/3677052.3698661.
[29] Robert Engle. Dynamic conditional correlation: A simple class of multivariate generalized
     autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity models. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics,
     20(3):339–350, 2002. doi: 10.1198/073500102288618487.
[30] Luc Bauwens, Sébastien Laurent, and Jeroen V. K. Rombouts. Multivariate GARCH models: A
     survey. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 21(1):79–109, 2006. doi: 10.1002/jae.842.
[31] Andrew J. Patton. Modelling asymmetric exchange rate dependence. International Economic
     Review, 47(2):527–556, 2006. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2354.2006.00387.x.
[32] Kjersti Aas, Claudia Czado, Arnoldo Frigessi, and Henrik Bakken. Pair-copula constructions of
     multiple dependence. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 44(2):182–198, 2009.
[33] José G. Dias, Jeroen K. Vermunt, and Sofia Ramos. Mixture hidden Markov models in finance
     research. In Advances in Data Analysis, Data Handling and Business Intelligence, pages
     451–459. Springer, 2010. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-01044-6_41.
[34] Matteo Rizzato, Julien Wallart, Christophe Geissler, Nicolas Morizet, and Noureddine Boumlaik.
     Generative adversarial networks applied to synthetic financial scenarios generation. Physica
     A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 623:128899, 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.physa.2023.
     128899.
[35] Samuel Kotz, Tomasz J. Kozubowski, and Krzysztof Podgórski. The Laplace Distribution and
     Generalizations: A Revisit with Applications to Communications, Economics, Engineering, and
     Finance. Birkhauser, 2001. ISBN 9780817641665.
[36] David Toth and Bruce Jones. Against the norm: Modeling daily stock returns with the Laplace
     distribution. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.10325, 2019.


                                                 16
[37] Jeff A. Bilmes. A gentle tutorial of the EM algorithm and its application to parameter estimation
     for Gaussian mixture and hidden Markov models. Technical Report TR-97-021, International
     Computer Science Institute, 1998.
[38] Paul Glasserman. Monte Carlo Methods in Financial Engineering. Springer, 2003. doi:
     10.1007/978-0-387-21617-1.
[39] James D. Hamilton. Regime switching models. The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics,
     pages 11421–11426, 2018. doi: 10.1057/978-1-349-95189-5_2459.
[40] Charles M. Grinstead and J. Laurie Snell. Introduction to Probability. American Mathematical
     Society, 1997.
[41] Dimitris N. Politis and Joseph P. Romano. The stationary bootstrap. Journal of the American
     Statistical Association, 89(428):1303–1313, 1994. doi: 10.1080/01621459.1994.10476870.
[42] Paul H. Kupiec. Techniques for verifying the accuracy of risk measurement models. The Journal
     of Derivatives, 3(2):73–84, 1995. doi: 10.3905/jod.1995.407942.
[43] Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merriënboer, Caglar Gulcehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares,
     Holger Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-
     decoder for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical
     Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1724–1734. Association for Compu-
     tational Linguistics, 2014. doi: 10.3115/v1/D14-1179.
[44] David G. Booth and Eugene F. Fama. Diversification returns and asset contributions. Financial
     Analysts Journal, 48(3):26–32, 1992. doi: 10.2469/faj.v48.n3.26.
[45] Harry M. Markowitz. Investment for the long run: New evidence for an old rule. Journal of
     Finance, 31(5):1273–1286, 1976. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-6261.1976.tb03213.x.
[46] A. N. Kolmogorov. Sulla determinazione empirica di una legge di distribuzione. Giornale
     dell’Istituto Italiano degli Attuari, 4:83–91, 1933.
[47] N. Smirnov. Table for estimating the goodness of fit of empirical distributions. The Annals of
     Mathematical Statistics, 19(2):279–281, 1948.
[48] Theodore W. Anderson and Donald A. Darling. Asymptotic theory of certain “goodness of fit”
     criteria based on stochastic processes. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 23(2):193–212,
     1952.




                                                 17
Tables

Table 1: Hidden Markov model with jumps (HMM-WJ) and single-index model (SIM) composi-
tion hyperparameters. Values used for the main SPY analysis, explored ranges, and locations of
sensitivity checks. For the primary six-method SIM comparison, we set ϵ = 0 instead of the SPY
value. The separate jump-enabled comparison transferred the listed SPY settings to enabled models.
The cross-asset validation used per-ticker (ϵ∗ , λ∗ ) values for NVDA, JNJ, and JPM (Table S10).
  Symbol          Description                                           SPY value         Explored range
    State partition and emission
  N             Laplace-quantile states                                 100               {30, . . . , 350}, Online Appendix S7
  ν             Student-t emission degrees of freedom                   5                 {3, . . . , 30, ∞}
    Jump-duration override
  ϵ          jump probability per step                                  10−4              [10−4 , 2.5 × 10−2 ], Eq. (3)
  λ          mean jump-episode duration (steps)                         90                [10, 160], Eq. (3)
  pneg       probability a jump targets S−                              0.52              fixed
  Ntail      quantile states per tail set                               5                 fixed (at N = 100)
  wκ         kurtosis-penalty weight, Eq. (3)                           0.20              fixed
  L          autocorrelation lag window, Eq. (3)                        25 days           fixed
    SIM composition
  f          idiosyncratic variance floor                               0.10              {0.05, . . . , 0.30}
    2
  Rpreserve  branch-selection threshold                                 0.80              {0.70, . . . , 0.90}




Table 2: In-sample and out-of-sample model comparison for SPY. Results summarize 1,000
simulated paths. Values in parentheses are standard errors, and bold entries are best among the fitted
generative models within each panel; the empirical bootstrap is excluded from this highlighting.
Metric definitions and standard-error calculations are given in Online Appendix S3.
Model              KS (%)         AD (%)              κ            ACF-MAE          Coverage (%)             W1             Hellinger
In sample: 2014–2024 (2,766 days; observed κ = 7.715)
Bootstrap    100.0 (<0.1) 99.7 (0.2) 7.6 (0.08) 0.060 (<0.001) 100.0 (<0.1)                            0.062 (0.001) 0.042 (<0.001)
Gaussian      0.0 (<0.1) 0.0 (<0.1) −0.0 (<0.01) 0.060 (<0.001) 13.1 (0.1)                             0.399 (0.001) 0.148 (<0.001)
Laplace        98.4 (0.4) 96.8 (0.6) 3.0 (0.02) 0.060 (<0.001) 78.8 (1.0)                              0.119 (0.001) 0.069 (<0.001)
GARCH(1,1) 5.5 (0.7)       1.9 (0.4)   8.2 (0.37)  0.031 (0.001) 29.3 (1.4)                            0.304 (0.006) 0.100 (0.001)
GRU             0.6 (0.2)  0.2 (0.1)   5.7 (0.16) 0.036 (<0.001) 17.2 (0.5)                            0.421 (0.003) 0.134 (<0.001)
HSMM           82.0 (1.2) 42.5 (1.6) 4.8 (0.08) 0.059 (<0.001) 68.7 (1.1)                              0.176 (0.001) 0.113 (<0.001)
HMM-NJ         99.3 (0.3) 98.2 (0.4) 8.1 (0.14) 0.059 (<0.001) 100.0 (<0.1)                            0.081 (0.001) 0.072 (<0.001)
HMM-WJ         98.3 (0.4) 94.8 (0.7) 7.5 (0.09) 0.053 (<0.001) 100.0 (<0.1)                            0.097 (0.001) 0.074 (<0.001)

Out of sample: 2025 (249 days; observed κ = 6.867)
Bootstrap      97.4 (0.5) 98.5 (0.4) 6.0 (0.18) 0.043 (<0.001) 100.0 (<0.1)                            0.232 (0.002)      0.205 (0.001)
Gaussian       62.2 (1.5) 46.3 (1.6) −0.0 (<0.01) 0.043 (<0.001) 36.4 (1.9)                            0.452 (0.002)      0.235 (0.001)
Laplace        96.7 (0.6) 98.1 (0.4) 2.8 (0.05) 0.043 (<0.001) 99.0 (0.4)                              0.242 (0.002)      0.207 (0.001)
GARCH(1,1) 80.3 (1.3) 72.0 (1.4) 1.6 (0.07) 0.026 (<0.001) 96.0 (1.3)                                  0.507 (0.018)      0.232 (0.001)
GRU            71.8 (1.4) 44.8 (1.6) 2.9 (0.10) 0.033 (<0.001) 77.8 (2.9)                              0.488 (0.005)      0.240 (0.001)
HSMM           96.2 (0.6) 96.7 (0.6) 4.1 (0.13) 0.042 (<0.001) 100.0 (0.2)                             0.287 (0.002)      0.239 (0.001)
HMM-NJ         96.6 (0.6) 96.1 (0.6) 6.2 (0.15) 0.041 (<0.001) 100.0 (<0.1)                            0.259 (0.003)      0.207 (0.001)
HMM-WJ         95.4 (0.7) 95.3 (0.7) 6.2 (0.15) 0.040 (<0.001) 100.0 (<0.1)                            0.275 (0.005)      0.210 (0.001)
 Model abbreviations are generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (GARCH), gated recurrent unit (GRU), hidden semi-Markov
 model (HSMM), hidden Markov model with no jumps (HMM-NJ), and hidden Markov model with jumps (HMM-WJ). Kolmogorov–Smirnov
 (KS) and Anderson–Darling (AD) report pass rates at α = 0.05; coverage is the fraction of empirical quantiles inside the synthetic 90%
 envelope. κ is simulated excess kurtosis. Mean absolute error in the autocorrelation function (ACF-MAE) is computed for |Gt | through lag
 252. Larger values are preferred for KS, AD, and coverage; smaller values are preferred for ACF-MAE, W1 , and Hellinger distance; κ is
 compared with the observed value.




                                                                   18
Table 3: Aggregate training scorecard with 100 replications per ticker. Errors, distances, and
tail metrics are medians per method. Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) and Anderson–Darling (AD) pass
fractions are pooled across replications. |α̂ − α|, |β̂ − β|, and |R̂2 − Rreal
                                                                           2
                                                                               |: absolute deviation
between ordinary least-squares (OLS) recovery and calibration (intercept error has units of yr−1 ).
KS pass and AD pass: fraction of replications whose two-sample test against the real marginal
exceeds p = 0.05. W1 : Wasserstein-1 distance to the real marginal. κ: sample excess kurtosis.
Hill: tail-index estimate on the upper 5% of |g|. SIM denotes the single-index model, and GARCH
denotes generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity. The GARCH method covered 393
non-market tickers; the other five methods covered 423.
 Method                 |α̂ − α|   |β̂ − β|    |R̂2 − Rreal
                                                       2
                                                            |    KS pass (%)     AD pass (%)      W1      κ       Hill
 Naive                    0.002       0.022             0.087              7.1           3.5   0.700   7.767    0.369
 Gaussian SIM             0.048       0.017             0.008              0.6           0.5   0.682   1.427    0.217
 Hybrid                   0.002       0.018             0.021             73.6          64.6   0.249   7.165    0.365
 JumpHMM-on-residuals     0.049       0.018             0.015             75.8          70.7   0.232   7.262    0.365
 Block bootstrap          0.042       0.017             0.020             73.3          66.8   0.232   6.675    0.330
 GARCH(1,1)-t             0.047       0.017             0.036             67.4          61.4   0.267   6.069    0.317




Table 4: Frozen-parameter multi-asset evaluation on the 2025 holdout. Results cover 416 non-
market tickers and 100 replications per ticker; generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedastic-
ity (GARCH) covers 386 tickers. Pass rates are first averaged within ticker and then across tickers.
The matched in-sample (IS) columns compare each synthetic path with a randomly selected contigu-
ous 249-day block from the 2014–2024 training history, matching the holdout sample length. W1
and the variance ratio are medians across ticker-level medians; the variance ratio is synthetic variance
divided by observed 2025 variance. The hybrid correction used the training-period market variance
and each simulated asset draw’s variance.
                                   KS pass (%)                  AD pass (%)
   Method                      matched IS       2025       matched IS       2025     W1 (2025)     variance ratio
   Naive                               69.4      83.5              54.8      71.6         0.877                1.29
   Gaussian SIM                        57.4      73.9              44.9      64.6         0.866                0.97
   Hybrid                              78.8      87.0              66.2      79.7         0.716                0.97
   JumpHMM-on-residuals                77.9      86.2              65.6      80.1         0.708                0.98
   Block bootstrap                     76.3      84.0              64.0      76.5         0.715                0.90
   GARCH(1,1)-t                        74.5      82.6              62.6      75.0         0.733                0.91




Table 5: Out-of-sample per-ticker one-day left-tail Value-at-Risk coverage across the six compo-
sition methods. VaR thresholds at coverage level α were estimated from frozen-parameter synthetic
paths and exceedances were counted against the real 2025 growth-rate history. The hybrid correction
used the same training-period market variance convention as Table 4. rate: mean of the per-ticker
mean exceedance rates (nominal: 1 − α). Cross-ticker standard deviation (SD) is reported in percent-
age points. Kupiec pass: mean within-ticker fraction of replications whose unconditional-coverage
test p-value exceeds 0.05.
                                              α = 0.95                                     α = 0.99
 Method                    rate (%)     SD (pp)      Kupiec pass (%)         rate (%)   SD (pp)    Kupiec pass (%)
 Naive                         4.37           2.15                  65.8         1.21      0.76                  78.9
 Gaussian SIM                  4.95           2.26                  70.0         2.03      1.17                  72.1
 Hybrid                        5.97           2.43                  66.3         1.67      0.93                  73.4
 JumpHMM-on-residuals          6.07           2.59                  67.0         1.67      0.95                  74.5
 Block bootstrap               6.13           2.56                  63.7         1.84      1.01                  73.4
 GARCH(1,1)-t                  5.79           2.47                  62.4         1.80      1.02                  72.0




                                                         19
Table 6: Jump settings under naive and corrected multi-asset composition. Each setting used
1,000 replications per asset across four seeds, with identical asset and market draws for the two
composition methods. SPY was simulated in both windows, and the correction used each simulated
market path’s variance and each asset draw’s variance. Entries are equal-weight cross-ticker means
of per-path metrics. Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) and Anderson–Darling (AD) report non-rejection
rates at α = 0.05. ACF25 and ACF60 are mean absolute errors in the absolute-return autocorrelation
                                                                                              2
function through lags 25 and 60; lower values indicate better temporal fit. Vgen = Var(gi )/σgen,i
compares composed variance with the active generator’s variance, rather than observed variance.
             Jump setting    Method      KS (%) AD (%)           ACF25     ACF60      Vgen
             Training: 2014–2024, 423 assets, 2,766 days
             Off             Naive          6.93      3.38      0.13585   0.09492   1.33273
             Off             Corrected    73.94      68.54      0.13569   0.09485   1.00011
             Market only     Naive          6.28      3.18      0.13197   0.09208   1.34938
             Market only     Corrected    73.64      67.81      0.12844   0.08969   1.00032
             Market + assets Naive          5.25      2.56      0.11727   0.08264   1.33445
             Market + assets Corrected    61.68      53.33      0.11581   0.08154   1.00018
             Holdout: 2025, 416 assets, 249 days
             Off             Naive         82.38        70.14   0.07322   0.06683   1.36081
             Off             Corrected     85.92        78.76   0.07330   0.06687   1.00041
             Market only     Naive         81.76        69.60   0.07347   0.06698   1.36638
             Market only     Corrected     85.88        78.72   0.07525   0.06796   1.00045
             Market + assets Naive         80.27        68.19   0.07672   0.06885   1.36032
             Market + assets Corrected     84.43        77.21   0.07832   0.06973   1.00039




                                                   20
Figures




Figure 1: Empirical stylized facts of SPY daily excess growth rates (2014–2024). Panel (a) shows
the heavy-tailed return density; the Laplace maximum-likelihood fit tracks the empirical peak and
tails while the Gaussian fit does not. Panel (b) shows departure from the diagonal in a normal
quantile-quantile plot at both extremes. Panel (c) shows the autocorrelation function of raw excess
growth rates. Individual correlations are small, although the Ljung–Box test detects joint serial
dependence. Panel (d) shows the autocorrelation function of absolute excess growth rates, which
decays slowly across the reported lags.




                                                21
                                     s              Poisson clock              K
                               s  tep                  prob. ϵ
                                                                                   ∼
                                                                                       Po
                         rc ed                                                            is(λ
                        o
                    λ)f                                                                        )   fo
                is(                                                                                  rce
              Po                                                                                        ds
          ∼                                                                                                  tep
      K                                                                                                         s
                                         state emission
                                            µk +σk · t5       jump triggered




                                                                prob. 1−ϵ

      1                       2          ···              k             ···    N −1                            N
                                                                                                                    state index

      S− (bottom tail)                                                                    S+ (top tail)

Figure 2: Architecture of the hidden Markov model with jumps (HMM-WJ). When no jump
episode is active, the chain transitions according to the empirical transition matrix T with probability
1 − ϵ (thin bidirectional arrows) or enters a Poisson jump episode with probability ϵ (dashed upward
arrow to the Poisson clock). During an episode, each of the K ∼ Poisson(λ) forced steps indepen-
dently draws the bottom tail set S− (red, lowest-valued states) with probability pneg or the top tail set
S+ (blue, highest-valued states) otherwise. Ordinary transitions then resume. Small bell curves above
each state show the state-conditional location-scale Student-t (ν = 5) emission distribution. Tail sets
are defined as the Ntail lowest- and highest-quantile states under the Laplace quantile partition.




Figure 3: Head-to-head in-sample model comparison for SPY (N = 100, 1,000 simulated paths).
Panel (a): marginal density of excess growth rates with in-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) pass
rates annotated per generator. Panel (b): autocorrelation function of |Gt | at lags 1–252 (shaded
bands: 10th–90th percentile across paths) per generator. Panel (c): tail quantile-quantile plot at the
0.1st–99.9th percentile region per generator.




                                                                 22
Figure 4: Effect of the hybrid variance correction on each ticker’s Kolmogorov–Smirnov pass
rate and variance ratio. Each point is a per-ticker median over 100 replications; thick lines are
binned medians. Panel (a): Kolmogorov–Smirnov pass rate against the real marginal at α = 0.05 for
                                                                                        2
naive composition (blue) and hybrid (orange). Panel (b): variance ratio Var(g)/σgen        for the same
two methods. The dotted curve is the theoretical naive inflation 1 + ρ evaluated at the universe-median
  2
σgen and the SPY annualized variance ∆t σm   2
                                                = 0.030 yr−1 of the closing-price series; the dashed
line marks a variance ratio of one.




Figure 5: Cross-ticker distribution of frozen-parameter out-of-sample marginal fit. Panel (a)
shows the distribution of per-ticker 2025 Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) pass rates across 100 replica-
tions; the dashed line marks 95%. Panel (b) compares each ticker’s hybrid KS pass rate against a
matched-length training block with its pass rate against the 2025 holdout. The diagonal denotes equal
performance.




                                                  23
Online Appendix

S1    Empirical cross-term diagnostic
The variance correction of Eq. (8) assumes Cov(g̃ic , gm ) ≈ 0, allowing the variance derivation to
omit the cross-term. This assumption does not follow automatically from the fitting procedure
because each JumpHMM uses the asset’s full growth-rate history, including its market-correlated
component. A remaining market loading in the generator draw would invalidate the closed-form
                                                                                      (r)
scale. We tested the assumption by sampling R = 100 generator growth-rate paths g̃i per ticker
from each generator and computing the normalized cross-covariance against the real return path for a
broad-market exchange-traded fund (ticker SPY):
                                                R          (r)
                                            1 X Cov((g̃i )c , gm )
                                covnorm
                                   i    =                          .                               (S1)
                                            R r=1  σgen,i σm

Centering does not change covariance, so these values are numerically identical to those obtained
from the raw draws. We plotted the per-ticker values as histograms (Fig. S1). Across the 423
tickers, the full-return JumpHMM generator (used by the hybrid and naive composition methods), the
residual-fit JumpHMM generator (used by the JumpHMM-on-residuals composition method), and
the Gaussian baseline had universe-mean normalized cross-covariances of 1.53 × 10−4 , 6.58 × 10−5 ,
and 2.26 × 10−4 , respectively. Their per-ticker values ranged from −0.0061 to 0.0061. These values
quantify the cross-term omitted in Eq. (8).




Figure S1: Empirical normalized cross-covariance Cov(g̃ic , gm )/(σgen,i σm ) across the 423-ticker
universe. Histograms were stacked per generator, with each per-ticker value averaged over R = 100
generator growth-rate paths. Universe means were 1.53 × 10−4 , 6.58 × 10−5 , and 2.26 × 10−4 for
the full-return JumpHMM, residual-fit JumpHMM, and Gaussian generators.


S2    Rebalancing under independent residuals
To determine what a portfolio-level use of these paths inherits from the independent-residual con-
struction, this appendix derives the diversification return of a rebalanced portfolio under Eq. (4). The
variance correction in Eq. (8) sets each synthetic asset’s second moment to its generator target. When
that target matches the empirical second moment, the second-order formula for the diversification
return is matched at the asset level as well. What the construction does not match is the cross-asset
residual covariance, and the derivation below isolates where that omission enters.
The synthetic paths reproduce per-asset marginals and single-factor cross-sectional dependence.
Each residual generator retains its own temporal structure, but the residual paths are generated


                                                    24
independently across assets at each date. The construction therefore omits cross-asset residual
covariance.
P            Consider a daily-rebalanced portfolio of N assets with constant target weights wi ≥ 0,
   i wi = 1, reset to those weights at the start of each trading day. Throughout this derivation gi (t)
is the annualized log-growth rate of Eq. (1), so the per-period log return on asset i is gi (t) ∆t with
∆t = 1/252 yr. The wealth process is:
                                                X                    
                                Wt = Wt−1            wi exp gi (t) ∆t ,                            (S2)
                                                        i
                                                                   P
so the per-step log return on the portfolio is log(Wt /Wt−1 ) = log i wi exp(gi (t) ∆t). We suppress
the time argument, writing gi for gi (t). A second-order Taylor expansion of the exponential about
                                      1         2            3
P is exp(gi ∆t) = 1 + gi ∆t + 2 (gi ∆t) + O((g ∆t) ). Substituting it into each summand of
zero
   i wi exp(gi ∆t) gives:
  X                   X 
                              wi 1 + gi ∆t + 21 (gi ∆t)2 + O (g ∆t)3
                                                                      
       wi exp gi ∆t =                                                                (Taylor)
   i                       i
                           X               X                                  X
                                               wi gi + 12 (∆t)2                         wi gi2 + O (g ∆t)3
                                                                                                              
                      =        wi + ∆t                                                                            (distribute)
                           i               i                                      i
                                  X                              X
                                       wi gi + 12 (∆t)2                   wi gi2 + O (g ∆t)3 .
                                                                                                                     P
                      = 1 + ∆t                                                                                    (   i wi = 1)
                                   i                              i
                                                                                                                                 (S3)
A second-order Taylor expansion of log(1 + x) about x = 0 gives log(1 + x) = x − 12 xP      2
                                                                                              + O(x3 ).
         P 1 + x2 with the right-hand side of Eq. (S3), the order-∆t
Identifying
1      2                                                          2
                                                                      correction is x := ∆t
                                                                             2          2
                                                                                           P i wi g2i +
2 (∆t)     i wi gi , and squaring keeps  only  the  leading  (∆t)   term:  x   =   (∆t)   ( i wi gi ) +
O((∆t)3 ) because the cross term has an extra ∆t factor. Substitution gives:
                         Wt                             
                    log      = log 1 + x + O (g ∆t)3
                        Wt−1
                             = x − 12 x2 + O x3
                                                  
                                   X                     X
                             = ∆t      wi gi + 12 (∆t)2      wi gi2
                                       i                                  i
                                               X                2
                                 − 12 (∆t)2                           + O (g ∆t)3
                                                                                                  
                                                        wi gi
                                                    i
                                                                      "
                                       X                                  X
                               = ∆t        wi gi + 12 (∆t)2                           wi gi2
                                       i                                      i
                                                                                              #
                                                                 X                      2
                                                                                                  + O (g ∆t)3 .
                                                                                                             
                                                            −                 wi gi                                              (S4)
                                                                      i

Dividing through by ∆t extracts the portfolio’s annualized one-step log-growth rate gp (t) :=
∆t−1 log(Wt /Wt−1 ), the portfolio counterpart of the per-asset gi (t) (still suppressing the time
argument):
                                                                    !
                   X                   X             X          2
                                               2
                                 1
                                                                       + O (∆t)2 .
                                                                                   
             gp =      wi gi + 2 ∆t        wi gi −         wi gi                               (S5)
                       i                        i                                 i

To obtain expected annualized portfolio growth, we restored the time argument and took unconditional
expectations of Eq. (S5) under stationarity. Define the per-asset annualized mean and variance:
                                                       σi2 := Var gi (t) ,
                                                                       
                                 µi := E gi (t) ,                                                 (S6)
                                                                                               2
the per-rate covariance Σij := Cov gi (t), gj (t) , and the per-rate portfolio variance σp :=
                      = w⊤ Σw. The O(∆t) correction in Eq. (S5) contains two squared quantities,
      P             
Var      i wi gi (t) P
              2                     2
P
   i wi gi (t) and (    i wi gi (t)) . Both expand by the second-moment identity, which holds for any
random variable X with finite second moment:
                                                     2
                                       E X 2 = E X + Var(X).
                                            
                                                                                                  (S7)


                                                            25
Applying this identity to X = gi (t) and summing against wi gives:
              X                   X
                     wi gi (t)2 =       wi E gi (t)2
                                                     
            E                                                                                 (linearity)
                   i                       i
                                           X
                                               wi µ2i + σi2
                                                           
                                       =                                                      (by Eq. (S7))
                                           i
                                           X              X
                                       =       wi µ2i +            wi σi2 .                                    (S8)
                                           i                   i

Applying the identity to X = i wi gi (t), whose mean is i wi µi and whose variance is σp2 , gives:
                                P                          P

        P               2     P              2      P             
      E       i wi gi (t)      = E    i wi gi (t)    + Var   i wi gi (t)   (by Eq. (S7))
                                 P         2
                               =    i wi µi       + σp2 .                                    (S9)

We substituted Eqs. (S8)–(S9) into the expectation of Eq. (S5) and grouped the variance and mean
contributions as follows:
                                                                 !
                             X                  X
                                          1              2     2
                    E(gp ) =     wi µi + 2 ∆t       w i σi − σ p
                                   i                       i
                                                   |            {z                   }
                                                                D                                             (S10)
                                           "                                         #
                                            X                  X               2
                               + 12 ∆t             wi µ2i −                              + O (∆t)2 ,
                                                                                                  
                                                                        wi µi
                                               i                    i

the Booth-Fama identity for the daily-rebalanced portfolio in annualized growth-rate units [44, 45].
The middle term, D, is the diversification return:Pthe O(∆t) correction equal to half the difference
between the weighted-average per-asset variance i wi σi2 and the portfolio variance σp2 . The per-rate
moments µi and σi2 have units yr−1 and yr−2 respectively; the products ∆t σi2 and ∆t σp2 in Eq. (S10)
are the annualized variances (yr−1 ). The third term in Eq. (S10) is the cross-sectional dispersion of
the per-asset annualized means, of order ∆t µ2 , against the variance term D of order ∆t σ 2 ; because
µ2 lies more than two orders of magnitude below σ 2 for daily growth rates (Table S1), P          we drop
it. The realized annualized compound growth rate ḡp = (T ∆t)−1 log(WT /W0 ) = T −1 t gp (t)
converges to E(gp ) by the ergodic theorem under any stationary residual process, so the long-run
limit is fixed by the one-time-slice unconditional joint distribution of (gi (t))i and does not, in itself,
depend on the serial structure of the residual draw.
To rewrite D in a form that makes its non-negativity manifest, expand σp2 =
                                                                                              P 2 2
                                                                                                 i w i σi +
2 i<j wi wj Σij and use the identity i wi (1 − wi )σi2 =                          2     2
  P                                      P                       P
                                                                        w
                                                                    i<j i jw   (σi  + σ j ) that holds for
any weights summing to one:
                                             !
                             X                           X
                       1              2    2
                D = 2 ∆t          wi σi − σp = 21 ∆t          wi wj Var(gi − gj ) ≥ 0,                (S11)
                               i                                    i<j

so D equals one-half the annualized weighted-average pairwise growth-rate-difference variance and is
therefore non-negative, with equality only when every pair (i, j) comoves perfectly (Var(gi −gj ) = 0)
or all weight concentrates on a single asset. The rebalancing rule itself produces this effect: weights
drift between rebalances, the rebalancer sells whatever has outperformed (its weight rose above target)
and buys whatever has underperformed (its weight fell below target), and the trade systematically
converts period-by-period cross-sectional dispersion into compounded growth. Markowitz [45]
described this as the variance bonus of the long-run mean-variance allocation; Booth and Fama [44]
called it the diversification return.
To separate market and residual contributions to the diversification return, we substituted the single-
                                                                                  2
index decomposition gi (t) = αi + βi gm (t) + εi (t), with market variance σm         := Var(gm (t)),
                             2
per-asset residual variance σε,i := Var(εi (t)), and Cov(gm , εi ) = 0 (verified in Sec. S1), into
Eq. (S11) gives:
                         Var(gi − gj ) = (βi − βj )2 σm 2
                                                           + Var(εi − εj ),                      (S12)


                                                          26
Because gm and the residuals are uncorrelated, this relation splits the diversification return into
market-beta-dispersion and idiosyncratic components:
                              X                             X
                            2
              D = 12 ∆t σm        wi wj (βi − βj )2 + 12 ∆t   wi wj Var(εi − εj ),            (S13)
                                i<j                             i<j
                      |               {z             }    |             {z              }
                                    Dmkt                                Dε

where the market-beta-dispersion component Dmkt equals 12 ∆t σm       2
                                                                        [ i wi βi2 − ( i wi βi )2 ], the
                                                                         P            P
                                                                                        2
weighted cross-sectional β dispersion scaled by the annualized market variance ∆t σm      . Across the
423-ticker universe the calibrated β distribution spans [0.03, 1.79] (Fig. S4). The weighted variance
of β is bounded by one quarter of its squared range, so Dmkt ≤ 18 ∆t σm  2
                                                                            (1.79 − 0.03)2 ; at the SPY
                         2              −1
annualized variance ∆t σm = 0.030 yr of the closing-price series used for the multi-asset universe
(Fig. 4), Dmkt is at most 0.012 yr−1 , or 1.2 percentage points per year over this universe. For the
idiosyncratic component Dε , residuals were approximately orthogonal across assets at the same time
                                    2       2
slice. Therefore, Var(εi − εj ) ≈ σε,i + σε,j , and Dε scales with the weighted-average annualized
                            2
idiosyncratic variance ∆t σε,i per name.
The second-order value of D depends on same-time unconditional moments, not on serial dependence.
                    2
Equation (8) sets σgen,i   = βi2 σm
                                  2    2
                                    + σε,i to its empirical target. Any residual generator with the same
unconditional second moments therefore gives the same D. This includes a stationary first-order
autoregressive [AR(1)] residual generator εi (t) = ϕ εi (t − 1) + ηi (t) with independent and identically
                                                          2
distributed innovations ηi tuned so that Var(εi ) = ση,i     /(1 − ϕ2 ) = σε,i
                                                                             2
                                                                               . The parameter ϕ leaves
the marginal distribution at a single time slice unchanged. It therefore does not change E(gp ) in
Eqs. (S10) and (S13), but it changes sampling variance. For a stationary AR(1) residual with variance
σε2 , the variance of its sample mean is approximately T −1 σε2 (1 + ϕ)/(1 − ϕ). Under ergodicity,
serial dependence changes per-path sampling noise, not the stationary mean. Serial dependence in
the residual draw is therefore not a lever on the diversification return at the level of the second-order
formula.
The direct structural difference is contemporaneous. The derivation assumes residuals are orthogonal
across assets at each time slice, as they are in the independent per-asset generator. Real residuals
share sector and style factors, which reduce Var(εi − εj ) below the independent-generator value
  2      2
σε,i + σε,j . Matching each marginal variance does not restore this covariance. The synthetic Dε will
therefore exceed its real-market counterpart when the omitted covariance is positive. Quantifying that
contribution requires a joint-residual experiment with the marginals and the allocation rule held fixed,
which we did not run. Realized diversification returns on real equity portfolios are also attenuated
relative to the second-order formula at all rebalancing horizons [13], so the synthetic excess is an
upper bound on what an independent-residual generator would contribute in a live comparison.

S3    Validation metric definitions
To make the validation criteria reproducible, we defined the distributional and tail metrics reported
in the main results. The two-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) statistic between the empirical
cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) of the observed and simulated growth-rate samples (Gobs
of length n and Gsim of length m) is D = supx |Fn (x) − Fm (x)| [46, 47]; the test rejects when D
exceeds the critical value at level α = 0.05. The R  Anderson–Darling (AD) statistic places greater
weight on the tails via the integral A2 = nm/(n + m) [Fn (x) − Fm (x)]2 /[F (x)(1 − F (x))] dF (x),
where F is the pooled empirical CDF [48]. The Wasserstein-1 distance between two empirical
distributions of equal length is the average of sorted-quantile differences:
                                                n
                                            1 X (i)           (i)
                                      W1 =          G − Gsim ,                                  (S14)
                                            n i=1 obs
with G(i) the ith order statistic. The Hill upper-tail index is the classical order-statistic estimator:
                                                 k−1             
                                      ˆ      1 X            X(i)
                                     ξ=               log           ,                                (S15)
                                           k − 1 i=1        X(k)
with X(1) ≥ X(2) ≥ . . . the ordered upper-tail absolute returns; k is set to the upper 5% of the
sample. For a Pareto-tailed distribution with shape α, ξˆ ≈ 1/α. For the Hellinger calculation, we


                                                   27
binned both samples on a common grid and normalized the bin counts to probability masses p and q.
Their distance is:
                                          1 √      √
                             H(p, q) = √        p− q       ∈ [0, 1],                       (S16)
                                           2            2

with H = 0 for identical probability masses and H = 1 for disjoint supports.
We abbreviate mean absolute error in the autocorrelation function as ACF-MAE.




Figure S2: Statistical validation of the hidden Markov model with jumps (HMM-WJ) (N = 100,
α = 0.05). Panels (a) and (d) condition on the ∼ 24% of in-sample paths containing jump events.
(a) In-sample KS p-values for 239 jump paths (pass rate 93.7%). (b) Out-of-sample KS p-values for
all 1,000 paths (pass rate 95.4%). (c) Out-of-sample density fan chart; the observed density falls
within the simulation envelope. (d) Observed and mean simulated in-sample autocorrelation function
(ACF) of |Gt | for jump paths.



Table S1: Descriptive statistics and stylized-facts tests for SPY daily excess growth rates. In-
sample (IS): 2014–2024 (T = 2,766); out-of-sample (OoS): 2025 (T = 249). Gaussian and Laplace
columns show maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) fits to the in-sample data. We used the Jarque–
Bera (JB) normality test and the Ljung–Box (LB) autocorrelation test at lag 20. ∗ denotes rejection at
α = 0.05.
  Statistic                               IS Observed          OoS Observed        Gaussian   Laplace
  Mean (annualized, %)                         6.31                 11.60            6.31      14.19
  Standard deviation of Gt (% yr−1 )          214.50                220.62          214.46     205.93
  Skewness                                   −0.753                −1.093              0          0
  Excess Kurtosis                             7.715                 6.867              0          3
  JB normality test                    reject∗ (p < 0.001)   reject∗ (p < 0.001)   not used   not used
  LB test on Gt (lag 20)               reject∗ (p < 0.001)   reject∗ (p = 0.019)   not used   not used
  LB test on |Gt | (lag 20)            reject∗ (p < 0.001)   reject∗ (p < 0.001)   not used   not used




                                                   28
S4     Derivation of the single-asset generator
This appendix derives the probability law of the fitted single-asset generator and connects each fitted
component to the empirical feature it controls. The hidden Markov model with jumps (HMM-WJ),
its no-jump restriction (HMM-NJ), and their symbols follow the main-text definitions in Eq. (2) and
Algorithm 1. Unless noted otherwise, numerical values evaluate the closed-form expressions at the
fitted SPY model of Table 1: N = 100 states, Student-t degrees of freedom ν = 5, jump probability
ϵ = 10−4 , mean episode duration λ = 90 steps, tail-selection probability pneg = 0.52, tail-set size
Ntail = 5, and the in-sample series of T = 2,766 daily excess growth rates. Table S2 collects these
values beside their sample or simulated counterparts.

Table S2: Closed-form quantities of the fitted SPY generator against sample and simulated
values. Each closed-form entry evaluates the expression named in the text at the fitted SPY model
of Table 1. Sample values are computed from the in-sample SPY series; simulated values use 400
in-sample-length paths for the jump-episode quantities and 1,000 paths for skewness. For comparison
with the sup-distance entry, the two-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov
                                             p                     critical value at α = 0.05 for two
samples of T = 2,766 observations is 1.358 2/T = 0.0365. Observed autocorrelations are those
of the in-sample series shown in Fig. 1d.
Quantity                                                                 Closed form at the fit        Sample or simulation
Stationary law and moments
State occupancy count, smallest and largest (of T = 2,766)                            –                      16, 47
Occupancy frequency π̂k , smallest and largest                                        –                   0.0058, 0.017
maxk |π̄k − π̂k |                                                               3.7 × 10−4                      –
Mean (yr−1 )                                                                      0.0636                     0.0631
supx |Fmix (x) − FbT (x)|                                                         0.0045                        –
Within-state variance Vw (yr−2 ), share of sample variance                      0.17, 3.6%                      –
Variance (yr−2 ), Student-t emissions                                               4.72                      4.60
Variance (yr−2 ), Gaussian emissions                                                4.61                      4.60
Standard deviation (yr−1 ), Student-t emissions                                     2.17                      2.14
Excess kurtosis, Student-t emissions                                                8.34                      7.72
Excess kurtosis, Gaussian emissions                                                 5.82                      7.72
Skewness, HMM-NJ (1,000 simulated paths)                                              –                      −0.76
Skewness, HMM-WJ (1,000 simulated paths)                                              –                      −0.73
Dependence without jumps
|θ2 |, smallest lag with |θ2 |τ < 0.01                                          0.253, lag 4                     –
ACF of |Gt | at lag 1, no jumps                                                     0.26                  0.30 (observed)
ACF of |Gt | at lag 3, no jumps                                                    0.021                  0.31 (observed)
ACF of |Gt | at lag 5, no jumps                                                    0.001                  0.26 (observed)
ACF of |Gt | at lag 25, no jumps                                                  < 0.001                 0.14 (observed)
Jump-episode arithmetic
Forced-step fraction πJ                                                           0.0089                0.0088 (400 paths)
Jump-path probability                                                              24.2%                24.8% (99 of 400)
Forced fraction within a jump path                                              3.3% (λ/T )                   3.6%
Forced-step standard deviation (yr−1 )                                              5.38                        –
Mean absolute return, forced āJ and free ā (yr−1 )                             4.96, 1.47                     –
Var(At ), single-episode conditioning                                               3.01                        –
Predicted jump-path ACF plateau                                                     0.13                        –
Excess kurtosis, single-episode jump path                                           7.20                        –
Variance inflation from forced steps, single-episode jump path                      17%                         –


S4.1    Generative law

The no-jump model generates a hidden state path S0 , . . . , ST on {1, . . . , N } and observations
G1 , . . . , GT with the joint density:
                                                                         T
                                                                         Y
                          p(s0 , . . . , sT , g1 , . . . , gT ) = π̄s0         Tst−1 , st fst (gt ),                  (S17)
                                                                         t=1




                                                            29
where π̄s0 is the initial probability of state s0 , Tst−1 ,st is the probability of moving from state st−1
to state st , and fk is the emission density of state k. Under Eq. (2), fk is the location-scale Student-t
density:
                                                                                       − ν+1
                                                                   Γ ν+1
                                                                          
                                                                                    x2
                                         
                           1       g − µk                              2
                                                                                           2

               fk (g) =       ψν             ,      ψν (x) = √                 1 +            ,      (S18)
                                                                    νπ Γ ν2
                                                                            
                          σk         σk                                             ν
where ψν is the density of a standard Student-t random variable with ν degrees of freedom, Γ is the
gamma function, and (µk , σk ) are the location and scale of state k. The factorization in Eq. (S17)
states the structural property that drives everything that follows: given the state path, the observations
are independent. Every form of serial dependence the generator can produce must therefore be carried
by the state path [9].
The jump-augmented model enlarges the hidden state. Let Jt ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . } count the forced steps
remaining after time t, and let u be the forced-step state distribution, which mixes uniform draws
over the two tail sets:               
                                      pneg /Ntail
                                                           k ∈ S− ,
                              uk = (1 − pneg )/Ntail k ∈ S+ ,                                  (S19)
                                      
                                        0                   otherwise.
                                      

Writing pK (m) = e−λ λm /m! for the Poisson probability of episode length m and 1{·} for the
indicator function, the pair (St , Jt ) evolves by the transition kernel:
                                                              
               Pr St = k, Jt = j | St−1 = s, Jt−1 = i
                         (
                           uk 1{j = i − 1}                                i ≥ 1,       (S20)
                     =
                            1 − ϵ + ϵe−λ Ts,k 1{j = 0} + ϵ pK (j + 1) uk i = 0,
                                            

and the emission draw depends only on the first coordinate, Gt ∼ fSt . The two cases read as follows.
While an episode is active (i ≥ 1), the next state is an independent draw from u and the counter
decrements; the tail set and the state within it are re-drawn at every forced step. While no episode is
active (i = 0), the chain either takes an ordinary transition (no trigger, or a trigger whose Poisson
draw returns zero) or starts an episode of length j + 1 ≥ 1 whose first forced step occurs immediately.
The pair (St , Jt ) is therefore itself a Markov chain, and the HMM-WJ generator is a hidden Markov
model on the enlarged state space {1, . . . , N } × {0, 1, 2, . . . }. Algorithm 1 implements Eq. (S20)
with the episode counter truncated at the simulation horizon; it emits the stationary initial draw as
the first observation and applies the kernel from the second step onward, which changes the law of a
path only through the absent possibility of a trigger at the first step. When an episode ends, ordinary
transitions resume from the last forced tail state, so the chain re-enters the body of the state space
through the tail rows of T.

S4.2   Estimators and the one-step empirical law

The fitting procedure consists of four closed-form estimators, and each one matches a specific
empirical object exactly. The Laplace partition comes first. For observations G1 , . . . , GT , the
Laplace log-likelihood with location µL and scale bL is:
                                                                T
                                                     1 X
                          ℓ(µL , bL ) = −T ln(2bL ) −      |Gt − µL |.                   (S21)
                                                    bL t=1
                                                    P
For any fixed bL > 0, maximizing ℓ over µL minimizes t |Gt − µL |, so µ̂L is the sample median.
Setting the bL derivative to zero at µ̂L gives:
                             T
             ∂ℓ     T     1 X
                = −    + 2      |Gt − µ̂L | = 0                       (first-order condition)
            ∂bL     bL   bL t=1
                          T
                      1X
              b̂L =         |Gt − µ̂L |,                              (solve for bL )               (S22)
                      T t=1



                                                   30
the mean absolute deviation about the median. The state boundaries then invert the fitted Laplace
cumulative distribution function (CDF) [35]. The Laplace CDF is piecewise exponential:
                                  (1                     
                                    2 exp (x − µ̂L )/b̂L         x ≤ µ̂L ,
                       FL (x) =                                                             (S23)
                                        1
                                                               
                                    1 − 2 exp − (x − µ̂L )/b̂L   x > µ̂L ,
and setting FL (Qk ) = k/N and solving each branch for Qk gives the closed-form boundaries:
     k                                               2k
          = 21 e(Qk −µ̂L )/b̂L =⇒ Qk = µ̂L + b̂L ln ,                      (lower branch)
     N                                                N
     k                                                             
          = 1 − 12 e−(Qk −µ̂L )/b̂L =⇒ Qk = µ̂L − b̂L ln 2 − 2k   N .      (upper branch)    (S24)
     N
The bins are equiprobable under the fitted Laplace, not under the empirical distribution, so the
in-sample state counts are not uniform: across the 100 states, they range from 16 to 47 of the
2,766 observations (Table S2). Every within-state mean µk and standard deviation σk was therefore
computed from at least 16 observations, and no state required a fallback to the global moments.
The transition matrix is the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) of a first-order Markov chain.
Conditional on the P assigned state sequence s1 , . . . , sT , let njk count the transitions from state j to
state k and let nj· = k njk be the row total. The likelihood of the transition parameters factorizes
over rows into multinomials, and maximizing the log-likelihood subject to each row summing to one,
with multiplier cj for row j, uses the Lagrangian:
                                  X                      X            X       
                           L =        njk ln Tjk +            cj 1 −      Tjk ,                       (S25)
                                   j,k                   j            k
whose stationarity conditions solve in three steps:
               ∂L         njk
                      =        − cj = 0                      (first-order condition)
              ∂Tjk        Tjk
                          njk
                Tjk =                                        (solve for Tjk )
                           cj
                         X                                                      P
                  cj =        njk = nj·                      (row constraint        k Tjk = 1)
                            k
                  b jk = njk .
                  T                                        (counted estimator)                     (S26)
                            nj·
The interior condition applies to cells with positive counts; for a cell with njk = 0 the log-likelihood
is non-increasing in Tjk , so its maximizer is the boundary value T   b jk = 0, which the same formula
returns. Multiplying Tjk by the row frequency nj· /(T − 1) recovers njk /(T − 1), the empirical
                       b
frequency of the state pair (j, k). The counted estimator therefore reproduces the in-sample joint
law of (St−1 , St ) exactly; everything it asserts about longer horizons is the Chapman–Kolmogorov
extension Tτ of that one-step law [37, 40]. The emission estimator completes the pair: within each
state, µk and σk are the sample mean and standard deviation of the assignedp      observations, and σk
enters Eq. (S18) as the scale, so the emission standard deviation is σk ν/(ν − 2). The aggregate
consequence of this scale convention is quantified in Eq. (S30).
The initial distribution ties the pieces together. Let nk count the occupancy of state k over the
T observations, and let π̂k = nk /T be the occupancy frequency. The row total satisfies nj· =
nj − 1{sT = j}, and the column total satisfies n·k = nk − 1{s1 = k}, because only the last
observation opens no transition and only the first closes none. Substituting both identities gives:
                  X nj njk
      π̂ b
         T k =             ·                                     (definitions)
                    j
                       T nj·
                   X nj·        njk   X 1{sT = j} njk
               =            ·       +            ·                   (nj = nj· + 1{sT = j})
                    j
                        T       nj·   j
                                            T      nj·

                 n·k     T
                         b s ,k
                             T
               =      +                                              (sum transitions into k)
                  T        T
                        b s ,k − 1{s1 = k}
                        T  T
               = π̂k +                     .                         (n·k = nk − 1{s1 = k})          (S27)
                                 T


                                                    31
The occupancy frequencies therefore satisfy the stationarity equation π̂ T    b = π̂ up to a fixed-point
residual bounded by 1/T . For the fitted SPY model, the solved eigenvector π̄ deviates from the
occupancy frequencies by at most 3.7 × 10−4 , the same order as 1/T , against occupancy values
between 0.0058 and 0.017 (Table S2). The initial distribution is consequently not an abstract spectral
object: π̄ is, up to a correction of the order of 1/T , the vector of in-sample state frequencies.

S4.3   Stationary distribution and moments

The stationary observation law of the no-jump generator follows directly from Eq. (S17). Marginaliz-
ing the state at a single time gives the mixture density and CDF:
                              N                               N                
                             X                               X           x − µk
                    p(g) =       π̄k fk (g),    Fmix (x) =      π̄k Ψν            ,           (S28)
                                                                           σk
                             k=1                                 k=1
where Ψν is the CDF of the standard Student-t with ν degrees of freedom. Every ingredient
of Eq. (S28) is an empirical summary: the weights are the in-sample state frequencies, and the
component locations and scales are the within-state sample moments. The generator’s marginal is
therefore a 100-component semiparametric estimate of the in-sample distribution, and reproducing
the empirical marginal requires no further tuning. The mean is matched by construction. Weighting
the within-state means by the occupancy frequencies telescopes into the grand mean:
              X             X nk 1 X
                  π̂k µk =          ·           Gt             (definitions of π̂k , µk )
                                 T nk
               k              k             t : st =k
                                   T
                              1    X
                         =          Gt ,                               (each t counted once)      (S29)
                              T t=1
and replacing π̂ by π̄ changes the value only through the 1/T correction of Eq. (S27): the model
mean is 0.0636 yr−1 against the sample mean of 0.0631 yr−1 (Table S2). The distributional match
is equally direct. Evaluated at the fitted SPY model, the largest gap between the model CDF and the
empirical CDF is supx |Fmix (x) − FbT (x)| = 0.0045 (Table S2), where FbT is the in-sample empirical
CDF. The two-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnovp(KS) critical value at significance level α = 0.05 for
two samples of 2,766 observations is 1.358 2/T = 0.0365, so the model-versus-data distance
consumes about one eighth of the rejection threshold. Rejections of simulated paths are therefore
driven by path-level sampling variation rather than by a misplaced marginal, which is consistent with
the in-sample pass rates in Table S4.
The second moment makes the role of the emission scale convention explicit. Conditioning on the
state and applying the law of total variance
                                             gives:         
        Var(Gt ) = E Var(Gt | St ) + Var E[Gt | St ]                  (law of total variance)
                         ν X          2
                                            X
                                                             2
                  =              π̄k σk +       π̄k (µk − µ̄) ,       (Student-t variance)      (S30)
                      ν−2
                              k              k
                                                        the within-state variance Vw = k π̄k σk2 and
            P                                                                             P
where µ̄ = k π̄k µk is the stationary
                                    P mean. Define
the between-state variance Vb = k π̄k (µk − µ̄)2 . The corresponding empirical decomposition of
the sample variance is Vb + Vw , up to degrees-of-freedom corrections, so the model variance exceeds
the sample variance by 2Vw /(ν − 2). At the SPY fit (Table S2), Vw = 0.17 yr−2 , only 3.6% of the
total variance of 4.60 yr−2 : the quantile partition concentrates almost all dispersion between states
rather than within them. The inflation is correspondingly small, a model variance of 4.72 against
4.60 yr−2 (2.17 against 2.14 yr−1 in standard deviation), and vanishes under Gaussian emissions
(4.61 yr−2 ).
The fourth moment explains the emission comparison in Table S4. Write Gt = µk + σk X within
state k, where X is a standard Student-t draw, and let δk = µk − µ̄. Expanding the fourth central
moment and dropping the odd-power terms, which vanish by the symmetry of ψν , gives:
                            X
          E (Gt − µ̄)4 =        π̄k E (δk + σk X)4
                                                
                                                                (condition on the state)
                               k
                              X
                                   π̄k δk4 + 6 δk2 σk2 E(X 2 )
                                      
                          =
                               k
                                           + σk4 E(X 4 ) ,
                                                        
                                                                                                  (S31)


                                                        32
with the standard Student-t moments, finite for ν > 4:
                                        ν                              3ν 2
                        E(X 2 ) =          ,          E(X 4 ) =                  .                 (S32)
                                       ν−2                        (ν − 2)(ν − 4)
At ν = 5 these values are 5/3 and 25: the within-state kurtosis is 9, against 3 for Gaussian emissions.
The excess kurtosis of the stationary mixture is E[(Gt − µ̄)4 ]/ Var(Gt )2 − 3; evaluating it at the SPY
fit gives 8.34 with Student-t emissions and 5.82 with Gaussian emissions, against an observed value
of 7.72 (Table S2). The emission choice enters Eq. (S31) through both moments in Eq. (S32); the
larger change by far is E(X 4 ) rising from 3 to 25, which acts on the σk4 terms that the wide tail states
dominate. The per-path simulated values reported in Table S4 (7.5 and 5.5) sit below these population
values because the sample kurtosis of a heavy-tailed series of 2,766 observations is biased downward,
but the population gap of 2.5 between the emission choices matches the simulated gap of 2.0 in both
direction and size. The mixture also carries the asymmetry of the fitted state occupancies without an
explicit skewness parameter: simulating 1,000 in-sample-length paths gives a mean sample skewness
of −0.76 for HMM-NJ and −0.73 for HMM-WJ, against the observed −0.75 (Tables S2 and S1).
Because the states partition the Laplace quantiles of an asymmetric series, the occupancy-weighted
mixture inherits that asymmetry through the µk and σk estimates.

S4.4   Dependence structure without jumps

The results stated so far concern single time slices; the dependence structure is where the no-jump
generator falls short of the data, and the failure is structural rather than a matter of estimation.
Within state k, the sojourn time is geometric: the chain remains for m steps with probability
  m−1
Tkk    (1 − Tkk ) and therefore stays for 1/(1 − Tkk ) steps on average, between one and two days
for every fitted
             state (Fig. S3c). The autocorrelation of absolute returns inherits
                                                                              P this short memory.
Let ak = E |Gt | St = k be the within-state mean absolute return and ā = k π̄k ak its stationary
average. Because observations are conditionally independent given the states, the lag-τ product
moment reduces to a state-pair sum:
                         X
     E |Gt | |Gt+τ | =         Pr(St = j, St+τ = k) aj ak        (conditional independence)
                            j,k
                            X
                                  π̄j Tτ jk aj ak ,
                                        
                        =                                               (Chapman–Kolmogorov)       (S33)
                            j,k

so the autocorrelation function (ACF) of |Gt | is:
                                                             
                                                           Tτ jk aj ak − ā2
                                           P
                                                 j,k π̄j
                            ACF|G| (τ ) =                                      .                   (S34)
                                                           Var(|Gt |)
As τ grows, Tτ converges to its rank-one limit, every row equal to π̄, at the geometric rate |θ2 |τ ,
where θ2 is the second-largest eigenvalue of T in modulus; the ACF is therefore bounded by a
constant multiple of |θ2 |τ . For the fitted SPY matrix (Table S2), |θ2 | = 0.253, and |θ2 |τ falls below
0.01 from lag 4 onward. Evaluating Eq. (S33) gives a model ACF of 0.26 at lag 1, close to the
observed 0.30 because the counted matrix pins the one-step state-pair law, but 0.021 at lag 3 and
effectively zero from lag 5, while the observed ACF remains near 0.26 at lag 5 and 0.14 at lag 25
(Table S2; Fig. 1d). No first-order chain fitted by transition counting can do otherwise: matching the
one-step law fixes T, and the spectral gap of that matrix then forces geometric mixing within a week.
This is the quantitative content of the main-text statement that the counted transition probabilities
leave extreme-return states too quickly to reproduce volatility clustering, and it is the failure the jump
mechanism corrects.

S4.5   Jump-episode arithmetic

The jump mechanism overlays the fast-mixing chain with rare, long episodes, and its operating
characteristics follow from renewal arguments. On each step with no active episode, an episode with
at least one forced step begins with probability pe = ϵ(1 − e−λ ), since a trigger whose Poisson draw
returns zero is discarded; conditional on starting, the episode length is the zero-truncated Poisson
draw with mean E[K | K ≥ 1] = λ/(1 − e−λ ). At λ = 90, the correction e−λ is below 10−39 ,
so pe = ϵ and E[K | K ≥ 1] = λ to machine precision. The long-run fraction of forced steps,


                                                      33
denoted πJ , follows from the renewal-reward theorem. A renewal cycle consists of the free steps
preceding an episode and the episode itself: the number of free trials up to and including the trigger is
geometric with mean 1/pe , the triggering trial is itself the first forced step, and the episode contributes
E[K | K ≥ 1] forced steps in total:
                       E[K | K ≥ 1]
            πJ =                                              (forced steps over cycle length)
                  1 − pe
                          + E[K | K ≥ 1]
                    pe
                       pe E[K | K ≥ 1]
                =                                             (multiply through by pe )
                  1 − pe + pe E[K | K ≥ 1]
                          ϵλ
                =                                             (pe E[K | K ≥ 1] = ϵλ)
                  1 − ϵ + ϵe−λ + ϵλ
                    ϵλ
                ≈          = 0.0089.                          (drop ϵe−λ , then ϵ)                     (S35)
                  1 + ϵλ
Fewer than one step in a hundred is forced at the fitted values; the measured fraction across 400
simulated in-sample-length paths is 0.0088 (Table S2). The product ϵλ is the quantity that sets this
fraction, a point that matters for identification in Section S4.6.
At the path level, the same arithmetic determines how episodes are distributed across the ensemble. A
simulated path contains no episode only if every one of its T − 1 transition steps fails to trigger one,
so the jump-path probability at T = 2,766 is 1 − (1 − pe )T −1 = 24.2%; the simulated ensemble
gives 24.8% (99 of 400 paths; Table S2), matching the ∼ 24% jump-path fraction conditioned on
in Fig. S2. Episodes begin at the long-run rate of one per expected renewal cycle, so a path carries
about 0.274 episodes in expectation. The expected gap between episodes is 1/ϵ = 104 trading days,
about 40 trading years, so the ensemble is a two-population mixture: roughly three quarters of the
paths never trigger an episode and follow the HMM-NJ law exactly, while the remaining quarter
carry a single episode (about one jump path in eight carries a second). Within a jump path, the forced
fraction is λ/T = 3.3% for a single episode; the simulated mean is 3.6% (Table S2), slightly higher
through the multi-episode paths. Forced steps differ sharply from free ones. Under the forced-step
distribution u of Eq. (S19), the conditional standard deviation is 5.38 yr−1        Pagainst the free-step
2.17 yr−1 , a variance ratio of 6.1, and the mean absolute return is āJ = k uk ak = 4.96 yr−1
against ā = 1.47 yr−1 (Table S2). The stationary state marginal of the augmented chain is the
mixture (1 − πJ ) times the free-phase distribution plus πJ times u; the free phase relaxes from the
post-episode tail state back to π̄ at the rate |θ2 | within a few steps. Using π̄ as the initial law therefore
misallocates O(πJ ) ≈ 1% of probability mass, which quantifies the main-text remark that π̄ is exact
for the ordinary transition matrix but approximate for the jump-augmented process.

S4.6   Autocorrelation and kurtosis under jumps

The tuning objective of Eq. (3) scores the absolute-return ACF and the excess kurtosis, and both
statistics admit closed-form approximations that show what (ϵ, λ) control. The ACF contribution rests
on one more renewal quantity: the probability h(τ ) that, given a step is forced, the step τ later belongs
to the same episode. A uniformly chosen forced step lands in an episode with the length-biased
law, an episode of length m covering m forced steps, and its position within that episode is uniform.
Combining the two gives:
                  X m Pr(K = m | K ≥ 1) (m − τ )+
       h(τ ) =                                 ·
                           E[K | K ≥ 1]              m
                 m≥1
                                    
                  E (K − τ )+ K ≥ 1
             =                                                     (sum over m)
                      E[K | K ≥ 1]
                      τ
             ≈ 1−           ,                                      (K concentrated near λ)           (S36)
                       λ +
where (x)+ = max(x, 0) √  and the approximation holds because the Poisson length concentrates
within a few multiples of λ ≈ 9.5 around λ. The same-episode probability therefore decays
almost linearly from one to zero over the horizon λ. The ACF follows by conditioning on the
forced-step indicator Zt = 1{step t is forced}. Given the indicator path, every forced step’s state


                                                     34
is an independent draw from u, so two forced observations are conditionally independent; the
dependence linking a forced observation to a later free one runs only through the episode’s final
state and, like the free-phase covariance itself, decays at the |θ2 |τ rate of Section S4.4. For lags
beyond that scale, only the conditional means covary. Write At = |Gt | for the absolute return. The
conditional mean is E[At | Zt ] = ā + Zt (āJ − ā), and for rare episodes the joint forced probability
is Pr(Zt = 1, Zt+τ = 1) ≈ πJ h(τ ), so:
                                                               
       Cov At , At+τ ≈ Cov E[At | Zt ], E[At+τ | Zt+τ ]                 (independence given Z)
                                     2
                                                        
                         = (āJ − ā) Cov Zt , Zt+τ                     (conditional mean in Z)
                         ≈ (āJ − ā)2 πJ h(τ ),                        (episodes rare)           (S37)
so the jump mechanism adds an ACF component of height πJ (āJ − ā)2 / Var(At ) that decays almost
linearly to zero at lag λ, precisely the slow component the counted chain cannot produce. For a jump
path carrying a single episode, the relevant forced fraction is λ/T rather than πJ , and evaluating the
resulting expression at the fitted values, with Var(At ) = 3.01 under the same conditioning, gives
a predicted plateau of 0.13 (Table S2). Table S3 compares this prediction with the mean simulated
jump-path ACF: the two differ by 0.013 at lag 5 and by less than 0.01 from lag 10 onward. At lags
1 to 3 the simulated values exceed the episode component (0.35 against 0.13 at lag 1; Table S3)
because the free-phase geometric component of Section S4.4 adds on top before it dies out.
The kurtosis contribution pulls in the opposite direction. Treating a jump path as a two-regime
mixture with weights (1 − λ/T, λ/T ) and evaluating the fourth-moment expression of Eq. (S31)
with the forced-step distribution u in place of π̄ for the episode regime gives a population excess
kurtosis of 7.20 for a single-episode jump path, against 8.34 with no jumps (Table S2). Forced steps
inflate the variance, by about 17% at the fitted values, faster than they inflate the fourth moment,
because u draws uniformly within each tail set rather than extending the extreme tail. Adding jump
content therefore lowers kurtosis toward and past the observed value while it raises the slow ACF
component; the jump-share sweep reported in the main text traces the same tradeoff empirically, with
the Hill tail index flat across the sweep because the tail exponent is set by ν, not by the jump content.
The objective of Eq. (3) balances these two effects.
The same expressions show how the two jump parameters are identified, and where they are not.
Within a single-episode jump path, the ACF component of Eq. (S37) has height proportional to λ/T
and horizon λ, and the kurtosis shift depends on the same forced fraction: every statistic entering
Eq. (3) for such a path is controlled by λ. The parameter ϵ moves the objective only through the
incidence of jump paths, which the jump-active conditioning removes, and through the small fraction
of multi-episode paths. This weak dependence is consistent with the tuned ϵ = 10−4 lying at the
lower edge of the explored range for SPY and for all three cross-asset tickers, and with the Monte
Carlo sensitivity of the tuned optima noted in Section S8. The objects entering every expression in
this appendix, the fitted boundaries, transition matrix, and residence times, are plotted in Fig. S3.




Table S3: Episode-overlap prediction of the jump-path absolute-return autocorrelation function
(ACF) against simulation. The prediction evaluates Eq. (S37) at the fitted SPY values with the
single-episode forced fraction λ/T in place of πJ and the same-episode probability h(τ ) of Eq. (S36).
The simulated column is the mean ACF of |Gt | over the 99 jump-active paths among 400 simulated
in-sample-length paths. The free-phase component of Eq. (S33) is excluded from the prediction; it
has decayed below 0.01 from lag 5 onward.
                          Lag τ    h(τ )    Predicted ACF     Simulated ACF
                              1    0.989        0.130              0.348
                              2    0.978        0.129              0.199
                              3    0.967        0.127              0.153
                              5    0.944        0.124              0.137
                             10    0.889        0.117              0.123
                             15    0.833        0.110              0.115
                             20    0.778        0.102              0.105
                             25    0.722        0.095              0.099


                                                   35
S5    Transition matrix internals and partition diagnostics
To determine why the ordinary state process required a duration override, we inspected the fitted
hidden Markov model with jumps (HMM-WJ) components for SPY at N = 100 (Fig. S3). The fitted
Laplace CDF and the empirical CDF are shown with the 99 state boundaries Qk . The transition
matrix T has a near-diagonal band, with most off-diagonal mass within ±5 states of the diagonal.
Under the ordinary Markov transitions, every state has an expected residence time of only 1–2 steps.
The fitted jump duration is λ = 90 steps, about two orders of magnitude longer. Every state had at
least one in-sample observation. This residence-time gap, rather than missing states, motivated the
duration override.




Figure S3: Fitted hidden Markov model with jumps (HMM-WJ) internals for SPY with N = 100
states. Panel (a) overlays the fitted Laplace cumulative distribution function (CDF) on the empirical
CDF; the 99 vertical lines mark the equal-probability quantile boundaries Qk that define the hidden
states. Panel (b) displays the estimated transition matrix T in log10 color scale; the dominant near-
diagonal band reflects short-range regime persistence. Panel (c) plots the expected natural residence
time 1/(1 − Tkk ) for each state on a log10 scale, with the bottom tail set S− (states 1–5, red) and the
top tail set S+ (states 96–100, teal) highlighted. The dashed horizontal line marks the fitted mean
jump duration λ = 90 steps, quantifying the two-order-of-magnitude gap between natural residence
times and the jump-duration override.


S6    Emission distribution and semi-Markov comparison
To compare the emission and duration specifications, we evaluated three variants on SPY (Table S4):
a hidden semi-Markov model (HSMM) baseline adapted from Bulla and Bulla [11] (K = 8 states,
negative-binomial dwell times with a geometric fallback, and Student-t emissions), HMM-WJ with
the original Gaussian emissions (N = 100), and HMM-WJ with Student-t emissions (N = 100).
Both HMM-WJ variants had higher in-sample KS and AD pass rates than the HSMM-style baseline.
The HMM-WJ variants use 100 states and the HSMM uses 8, so this comparison does not assign
the pass-rate difference solely to the duration model. Holding the rest of HMM-WJ fixed, changing
the emission from Normal to Student-t (ν = 5) increased simulated excess kurtosis from 5.5 to 7.5,
against an observed value of 7.7 (Table S1). The Student-t emission also increased the KS and AD
pass rates, while ACF-MAE and the distributional distances changed modestly. The emission choice
therefore explained the kurtosis gain in this controlled HMM-WJ comparison, while it changed
temporal fit little.




                                                  36
Table S4: Three-way comparison of emission distributions and duration specifications for SPY.
Standard errors in parentheses; bold marks the best value per row. The HSMM is a hidden semi-
Markov-style model adapted from Bulla and Bulla (K = 8 states, negative-binomial dwell times with
a geometric fallback, and Student-t emissions) [11]; HMM-WJ: hidden Markov model with jumps
(N = 100). All entries are computed from 1,000 simulated paths at significance level α = 0.05.
Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS), Anderson–Darling (AD), and mean absolute error in the autocorrelation
function (ACF-MAE) are defined in Section S3.
              Metric                  HSMM              HMM-WJ            HMM-WJ
                                    (Student-t)         (Gaussian)        (Student-t)
              States                  K=8                N = 100              N = 100
               In-sample (2,766 trading days, 2014–2024)
              KS pass rate (%)      82.0 (1.2)         97.0 (0.5)          98.3 (0.4)
              AD pass rate (%)      42.5 (1.6)         90.5 (0.9)          94.8 (0.7)
              Excess kurtosis       4.8 (0.08)         5.5 (0.03)          7.5 (0.09)
              ACF-MAE            0.059 (< 0.001) 0.052 (< 0.001)        0.053 (< 0.001)
              Wasserstein-1       0.176 (0.001)      0.101 (0.002)       0.097 (0.001)
              Hellinger          0.113 (< 0.001) 0.076 (< 0.001)        0.074 (< 0.001)
               Out-of-sample (249 trading days, 2025)
              KS pass rate (%)      96.2 (0.6)         95.0 (0.7)          95.4 (0.7)
              AD pass rate (%)      96.7 (0.6)         95.9 (0.6)          95.3 (0.7)
              Excess kurtosis       4.1 (0.13)         4.9 (0.08)          6.2 (0.15)
              ACF-MAE           0.042 (< 0.001) 0.040 (< 0.001)         0.040 (< 0.001)
              Wasserstein-1       0.287 (0.002)     0.275 (0.005)        0.275 (0.005)
              Hellinger           0.239 (0.001)      0.212 (0.001)       0.210 (0.001)




Table S5: Hybrid composition method broken out by branch. Ntickers : number of tickers assigned
                         2
to each branch by the Rpreserve = 0.80 threshold. The clipped variance-preserving branch does not
trigger anywhere in the universe (ρi < 0.90 for all tickers) and is omitted. The two trackers in the
R2 -preserving branch (QQQ and SPYG) had median absolute errors of 0.005 for β and 0.001 for
R2 , with a KS pass rate of 100%.
         Branch          Ntickers   |β̂ − β|   |R̂2 − Rreal
                                                       2
                                                            |   KS pass (%)      W1         κ
         hybrid              421      0.018            0.021           73.5    0.250     7.142
         r2-preserve           2      0.005            0.001          100.0    0.099    11.525




                                                  37
Table S6: Synthetic-tracker grid for the R2 -preserving branch. The observed universe places only
                                                                                 2
two tickers on this branch, so we generated synthetic trackers at each (βtrue , Rtrue ) cell, composed
                                               2
them with Algorithm 2, and recovered (β̂, R̂ ) by ordinary least squares. Entries are medians over
100 replications per cell with cross-replication standard deviations in parentheses; the Kolmogorov–
Smirnov (KS) pass rate is the fraction of replications whose two-sample test against the target
marginal exceeds p = 0.05. Every cell was assigned to the R2 -preserving branch.
                           2
                 βtrue    Rtrue           β̂               R̂2          KS pass (%)
                  0.8      0.80    0.8006 (0.0072)    0.7998 (0.0044)      100.0
                  0.8      0.85    0.8006 (0.0059)    0.8497 (0.0041)      100.0
                  0.8      0.90    0.8004 (0.0048)    0.8999 (0.0028)      100.0
                  0.8      0.95    0.7995 (0.0033)    0.9500 (0.0013)      100.0
                  0.8      0.99    0.7999 (0.0016)    0.9901 (0.0003)      100.0
                  1.0      0.80    1.0003 (0.0089)    0.8017 (0.0052)      100.0
                  1.0      0.85    0.9994 (0.0084)    0.8497 (0.0039)      100.0
                  1.0      0.90    0.9999 (0.0065)    0.8999 (0.0026)      100.0
                  1.0      0.95    1.0005 (0.0036)    0.9502 (0.0013)      100.0
                  1.0      0.99    1.0000 (0.0018)    0.9900 (0.0003)      100.0
                  1.2      0.80    1.2007 (0.0126)    0.8001 (0.0048)      100.0
                  1.2      0.85    1.2011 (0.0105)    0.8503 (0.0043)      100.0
                  1.2      0.90    1.1996 (0.0081)    0.8994 (0.0027)      100.0
                  1.2      0.95    1.1995 (0.0052)    0.9498 (0.0014)      100.0
                  1.2      0.99    1.1998 (0.0025)    0.9900 (0.0003)      100.0



S7    State-resolution sensitivity
To test whether the results depended on state resolution, we swept the partition over N ∈
{30, 60, 90, 100, 150, 200, 350} and re-evaluated the in-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) and
Anderson–Darling (AD) pass rates and the mean absolute error in the absolute-return autocorrelation
function (ACF-MAE) for the hidden Markov model with no jumps (HMM-NJ) and the hidden
Markov model with jumps (HMM-WJ), holding the tail-set size Ntail fixed (Table S7). HMM-NJ was
insensitive to the partition: its pass rates moved by less than one percentage point and its ACF-MAE
was unchanged at the reported precision, as expected for a model with no duration override whose
behavior could depend on the width of a tail state. HMM-WJ traded the two metrics against each
other. Because Ntail is fixed, a finer partition makes the tail set a narrower quantile band, so each
forced step lands further out, and ACF-MAE improved from 0.057 at N = 30 to 0.045 at N = 200.
The same narrowing left fewer observations behind each tail state’s emission parameters, and the AD
pass rate, which weights tail discrepancies heavily, moved the other way, from 97.1% at N = 30 to
82.8% at N = 200. The intermediate values were not monotone, which is consistent with re-running
the (ϵ, λ) grid search on a finite path ensemble at each N . At N = 350 several quantile bins were
never visited in the historical record, leaving the corresponding emission parameters undefined. We
adopted N = 100 for all subsequent experiments as a midpoint that held the KS pass rate above
98% and the AD pass rate within a few percentage points of its best value while capturing part of the
ACF-MAE improvement.




                                                 38
Table S7: Sensitivity of in-sample fit to the number of states N . All entries are computed from
1,000 simulated in-sample-length paths for SPY at significance level α = 0.05, with the tail-set
size Ntail and the remaining hyperparameters of Table 1 held fixed and the (ϵ, λ) grid search re-run
at each N for the hidden Markov model with jumps (HMM-WJ). Standard errors in parentheses:
binomial for pass rates, bootstrap (B = 500) for the mean absolute error in the absolute-return
autocorrelation function (ACF-MAE). HMM-NJ denotes the hidden Markov model with no jumps.
Values at N = 100 reproduce the corresponding entries of Table 2.
                 Model        N     KS pass (%)         AD pass (%)     ACF-MAE
                 HMM-NJ        30     99.3 (0.3)         97.8 (0.5)   0.059 (< 0.001)
                 HMM-NJ        60     99.5 (0.2)         98.5 (0.4)   0.059 (< 0.001)
                 HMM-NJ        90     99.3 (0.3)         98.6 (0.4)   0.059 (< 0.001)
                 HMM-NJ       100     99.3 (0.3)         98.2 (0.4)   0.059 (< 0.001)
                 HMM-NJ       150     99.1 (0.3)         98.7 (0.4)   0.059 (< 0.001)
                 HMM-NJ       200     99.2 (0.3)         98.3 (0.4)   0.059 (< 0.001)
                 HMM-WJ        30     98.4 (0.4)         97.1 (0.5)   0.057 (< 0.001)
                 HMM-WJ        60     96.7 (0.6)         91.4 (0.9)   0.053 (< 0.001)
                 HMM-WJ        90     98.3 (0.4)         95.2 (0.7)   0.055 (< 0.001)
                 HMM-WJ       100     98.3 (0.4)         94.8 (0.7)   0.053 (< 0.001)
                 HMM-WJ       150     97.7 (0.5)         91.7 (0.9)   0.052 (< 0.001)
                 HMM-WJ       200     96.0 (0.6)         82.8 (1.2)    0.045 (0.001)




                                                       2                   2
Figure S4: Branch assignment in calibrated (β, Rreal      ) space. The Rpreserve  = 0.80 threshold
(dashed line) separates tracker assets from single stocks. In this universe, only QQQ and SPYG
exceed the threshold, and both are assigned to the R2 -preserving branch. The remaining 421 tickers
populate the variance-preserving branch; the clipped variance-preserving branch is unused because
the market loading ratio ρi = βi2 σm
                                   2   2
                                     /σgen,i stays below 0.90 for every ticker.




                                                   39
Table S8: Aggregate metrics by β quartile, across composition methods. Quartile cutoffs are
computed from the calibrated β distribution across the 423-ticker universe. The hybrid KS pass rate
declines from 87.6% in Q1 to 65.9% in Q4 as the market loading ratio ρi grows; the naive KS pass
rate falls from 24.6% to 1.3% over the same range.
       β bucket      Method                   |β̂ − β|     KS pass (%)    W1        κ    Var(g)
       Q1 (low β)    Naive                      0.018             24.6   0.403   8.971    18.1
                     Gaussian SIM               0.015              0.0   0.620   0.622    14.0
                     Hybrid                     0.016             87.6   0.177   8.369    14.6
                     JumpHMM-on-residuals       0.015             73.2   0.204   7.059    14.3
                     Block bootstrap            0.015             71.3   0.208   6.286    13.9
                     GARCH(1,1)-t               0.015             57.8   0.253   5.255    13.4
       Q2            Naive                      0.021              1.9   0.621   7.510    25.1
                     Gaussian SIM               0.016              0.2   0.653   1.509    18.0
                     Hybrid                     0.017             74.9   0.231   6.889    19.0
                     JumpHMM-on-residuals       0.017             82.7   0.200   7.799    18.7
                     Block bootstrap            0.016             79.8   0.197   7.213    18.0
                     GARCH(1,1)-t               0.015             76.4   0.227   6.470    17.8
       Q3            Naive                      0.023              0.7   0.792   7.390    33.3
                     Gaussian SIM               0.017              1.4   0.688   1.947    23.4
                     Hybrid                     0.018             66.1   0.279   6.904    24.4
                     JumpHMM-on-residuals       0.018             78.3   0.242   7.454    24.0
                     Block bootstrap            0.017             75.0   0.236   6.888    22.8
                     GARCH(1,1)-t               0.016             71.0   0.263   6.265    21.9
       Q4 (high β)   Naive                      0.029              1.3   0.965   7.233    51.2
                     Gaussian SIM               0.022              0.6   0.825   2.054    36.3
                     Hybrid                     0.022             65.9   0.339   6.739    37.1
                     JumpHMM-on-residuals       0.022             69.1   0.313   6.842    37.0
                     Block bootstrap            0.021             67.2   0.311   6.334    35.3
                     GARCH(1,1)-t               0.021             64.5   0.361   6.064    34.7




Table S9: Clipping-branch stress test under market-volatility scaling. The market growth-rate
path was rescaled by γ ∈ {1, 2, 3} with the calibrated marginals held fixed, and the full hybrid
composition method re-evaluated on the 423-ticker universe. As γ rises, the share of clipped tickers
grows.
                                          γ   Clipped (%)
                                          1               0.0
                                          2              76.4
                                          3              95.2



S8    Cross-asset generalization
To test whether the single-asset procedure generalized beyond SPY, we repeated the fitting and
evaluation on three stocks: NVDA (semiconductors, high volatility), JNJ (health care, low volatility),
and JPM (financials, moderate volatility). Per-ticker tune outputs at (npaths = 200, seed = 1234)
were reproducible with these settings (Table S10). The objective combines ACF and kurtosis errors
with fixed weights. Because kurtosis varies across finite samples of heavy-tailed paths, the selected
grid point can change with the Monte Carlo sample. The reported (ϵ∗ , λ∗ ) values are reproducible
with the stated path count and seed, but they are not unique per-ticker optima. At the selected
parameter values, in-sample HMM-WJ KS pass rates were 98.9% for NVDA, 99.4% for JNJ, and
99.1% for JPM. Out-of-sample KS pass rates on the 249-day 2025 hold-out were 97.7%, 74.0%, and
79.2%, respectively. Thus the strong in-sample fit transferred unevenly across assets, especially on
the short holdout.




                                                 40
Table S10: Cross-asset generalization of the hidden Markov model with jumps (HMM-WJ)
across three single-stock tickers spanning sector and volatility regimes. Per-ticker tune outputs
(ϵ∗ , λ∗ ) at npaths = 200 and seed = 1234, and the corresponding HMM-WJ Kolmogorov–Smirnov
(KS) and Anderson–Darling (AD) pass rates on 1,000 simulated paths at α = 0.05 against each
ticker’s in-sample (IS; 2014–2024) and out-of-sample (OoS; 2025) growth-rate history. Values in
parentheses are binomial standard errors (SEs) for pass rates. The (ϵ∗ , λ∗ ) values are reported as the
parameter values used for the IS / OoS metrics rather than as canonical per-ticker optima.
   Ticker                       ϵ∗    λ∗    IS KS (%)    IS AD (%)     OoS KS (%)      OoS AD (%)
                                 −4
   NVDA (semiconductors)      10      70    98.9 (0.3)    96.7 (0.6)     97.7 (0.5)      96.1 (0.6)
   JNJ (health care)          10−4    70    99.4 (0.2)    96.3 (0.6)     74.0 (1.4)      61.3 (1.5)
   JPM (financials)           10−4    80    99.1 (0.3)    95.7 (0.6)     79.2 (1.3)      77.7 (1.3)




Figure S5: Calibrated R2 distribution across the 423 non-SPY tickers. Histogram of ordinary
least-squares (OLS) R2 against SPY over the 2014–2024 window. The two tickers crossing the
  2
Rpreserve = 0.80 threshold (dashed line) are index exchange-traded funds (QQQ, SPYG); the highest-
R2 individual stock (BLK, 0.645) falls ∼ 0.16 below the threshold. The R2 -preserving branch
therefore contains only QQQ and SPYG in this universe.




                                                  41
Figure S6: Heavy-tail preservation: excess kurtosis and Hill tail index vs calibrated β. Each
point is a per-ticker median over 100 replications. Left: excess kurtosis, y-axis clipped to [−2, 20]
for readability. The dashed line marks the median real-data excess kurtosis across the universe
(κreal ≈ 13); the hybrid and naive composition methods (orange and blue) track the generator’s
kurtosis, while the Gaussian single-index model (SIM) collapses to κ ≈ 1. Right: Hill tail-index
estimator on the upper 5% of |g|. The hybrid and naive medians remain near 0.37 throughout the β
range; Gaussian SIM drops to ∼ 0.22. The hybrid’s median being below κreal reflects the JumpHMM
marginal’s own kurtosis rather than a composition-rule distortion: hybrid tracks naive (both retain the
generator’s tails) while Gaussian SIM does not.


S9    SIM composition derivations and properties verification
To verify the two closed-form targets used by the variance-corrected single-index composition, we
derived the variance scale of Eq. (8), the residual-variance target of Eq. (11), and the resulting large-T
OLS coefficients and composed variance. To derive Eq. (8), first center the full-return draw as in
Eq. (6), then set εi = si g̃ic for si ∈ [0, 1] and require that the composed series have the same variance
as the generator path:
                                                                        2
                 Var(gi ) = Var(αi + βi gm + εi ) = Var(βi gm + εi ) = σgen,i ,                          (S38)
where αi drops out because it is constant. Expanding the sum gives:
                 Var(βi gm + εi ) = βi2 Var(gm ) + 2βi Cov(gm , εi ) + Var(εi ).                         (S39)
Substituting εi = si g̃ic gives Var(εi ) = s2i σgen,i
                                                   2
                                                        and Cov(gm , εi ) = si Cov(gm , g̃ic ). Under
                       c
the assumption Cov(g̃i , gm ) ≈ 0, the cross term vanishes and the variance condition becomes
βi2 σm
     2
       + s2i σgen,i
              2        2
                    = σgen,i . Solving for s2i gives Eq. (8).
To derive Eq. (11), use the same zero-cross-covariance assumption and write the population R2
identity for Eq. (4):
                                                β 2 σ2
                                     R2 = 2 2i m 2 .                                     (S40)
                                             βi σm + σε,i
Solving this identity for the residual variance gives Eq. (11). Because εi = 0 after centering and
scaling, the sample mean of a composed path obeys g i = αi + βieff g m . Hence, the finite-sample OLS
intercept was:
                               α̂i = g i − β̂i g m = αi − (β̂i − βieff )g m .                            (S41)
Under the zero-cross-covariance assumption, in the large-T limit OLS therefore gives α̂i → αi and
β̂i → βieff . Here βieff = βi unless Eq. (10) clips the market loading. On the variance-preserving
                                         2
branch, the composed variance is σgen,i       . Without clipping, Var(gi ) = βi2 σm 2
                                                                                        + s2i σgen,i
                                                                                                2         2
                                                                                                      = σgen,i .
                                   eff                                            2
Under clipping, Eq. (10) sets βi to give the same variance. On the R -preserving branch, the
composed variance is βi2 σm2    2
                             /Ri,real                                               2
                                       , the value implied by the calibrated (βi , Ri,real ) rather than by the
                                                                                                          2
generator marginal. On the ordinary-stock branch, the floor guarantees only that Var(εi ) ≥ f σgen,i           ;
it does not guarantee that adding the market term preserves the generator’s tail distribution. The KS
pass rate fell from 87.6% in the lowest-beta quartile to 65.9% in the highest-beta quartile (Table S8).


                                                      42
The zero-sum constraint also fixes the residual contribution to the terminal cumulative log return.
With time step ∆t, summing the composed growth rates gives the exact identity:
                        T
                        X                                   T
                                                            X               T
                                                                            X
                   ∆t         gi (t) = T ∆t αi + βieff ∆t         gm (t),         εi (t) = 0.       (S42)
                        t=1                                 t=1             t=1

For a fixed market path and effective loading, the residual contributes no terminal uncertainty. Partial
sums before T can still vary. If clipping changes the loading between draws, terminal returns can vary
through βieff , but the residual sum remains zero. Centering uses the full horizon and is not equivalent
to subtracting a fitted population mean. Changing the requested horizon can change both the center
and the scale applied to an otherwise identical prefix. These paths are therefore constrained over
a specified horizon and do not represent unconstrained cumulative residual returns. In the training
comparison, the OLS calibration further implies αi = g i,real − βi g m,real . Using observed training
SPY and βieff = βi therefore matches the observed asset mean exactly. Intercept recovery must be
interpreted with that constraint in mind.

S9.1   Role of the centered full-return draw as the residual

The hybrid composition places εi = si g̃ic , a centered and rescaled draw of asset i’s full return, in
the residual slot of Eq. (4). On its face this is a category mismatch: the residual of a single-index
decomposition is the idiosyncratic component of the return, orthogonal to the market, while g̃ic is
distributed like the centered total return, market-driven component included. This appendix states
what the substitution preserves exactly, what it preserves approximately, and how the approximation
degrades as the market loading grows.
The residual slot must supply three things: a zero mean, so that the intercept and market term alone
                                            2
set the conditional mean; the variance σgen,i    − βi2 σm
                                                        2
                                                           not already contributed by the market term;
and the asset-specific distributional shape, the heavy tails and volatility clustering that motivated
the single-asset generator. Centering gives the residual path an exactly zero sample mean (Eq. (6)).
On the unclipped non-tracker branch, using the market path variance in Eq. (8) gives the residual
exactly the remaining variance. The composed variance also contains the sample cross-covariance
term, which need not vanish on a finite path. Under the independence and large-T assumptions of
Section S9, the recovered loadings and intercept converge to their targets. Using the frozen training
market variance, as in the six-method holdout evaluation, adds a further variance difference if the
simulated market variance differs from that training value. The full-return draw supplies the residual’s
shape, but its validation as a standalone asset generator does not establish that it reproduces the asset’s
regression-residual distribution.
At ρi = 0, Eq. (8) gives si = 1 and the market term contributes no variance. The composed path
then has the same centered empirical distribution as the generator path, while its mean is set by
the intercept and market term. Equality with the original uncentered generator distribution would
additionally require those means to agree. For ρi > 0, the independent market contribution changes
even the centered distribution. To describe that change, take the unclipped non-tracker branch with
population variances and fixed scales. In population, conditional on the fitted parameters, write the
                                                                                       c
deviation of the composed return from its mean as Xm + Xi , where Xm = βi gm              is the market
                c                                                           c
contribution, gm is the market path centered at its mean, and Xi = si g̃i is the scaled asset draw;
                             2                          2
their variances are vm = ρi σgen,i  and vi = (1 − ρi ) σgen,i . Independence factors every cross term in
the fourth moment:
     E (Xm + Xi )4 = E(Xm       4           3
                    
                                  ) + 4 E(Xm  ) E(Xi )
                                      2
                               + 6 E(Xm ) E(Xi2 ) + 4 E(Xm ) E(Xi3 )
                               + E(Xi4 )                                      (independence)
                                 4
                         =    E(Xm ) + 6 vm vi + E(Xi4 ).                     (EXm = EXi = 0)       (S43)
Writing κm and κgen for the excess kurtosis of the market path and of the generator draw, the
                                 4               2
component fourth moments are E(Xm  ) = (κm + 3) vm and E(Xi4 ) = (κgen + 3) vi2 , where rescaling




                                                      43
by si leaves excess kurtosis unchanged. The excess kurtosis of the composed return follows by
dividing Eq. (S43) by the squared total variance:
                               2
                     (κm + 3) vm + 6 vm vi + (κgen + 3) vi2
   κ(Xm + Xi ) =                                            − 3
                                  (vm + vi )2
                         2
                     κm vm + κgen vi2 + 3 (vm + vi )2
                   =                                  − 3                  (collect terms)
                               (vm + vi )2
                   = κm ρ2i + κgen (1 − ρi )2 .                                        2
                                                                           (vm + vi = σgen,i )     (S44)
The generator’s excess kurtosis survives composition with weight (1 − ρi )2 and the market path’s
enters with weight ρ2i ; a simulation check with independent generator draws matched Eq. (S44) to
within 0.03 in mean excess kurtosis at ρi ∈ {0.1, 0.3, 0.5} (Table S11). For a low-loading asset the
composed tails are essentially the generator’s: at ρi = 0.10 the generator’s kurtosis retains weight
0.81. As ρi grows the composed shape moves away from the asset’s own marginal, which is the
pattern in the documented diagnostics: the hybrid tracks the generator’s kurtosis across the β range
while the Gaussian SIM does not (Fig. S6), and the hybrid KS pass rate declines from the lowest to
the highest β quartile (Table S8).
The residual-fit methods offer a direct alternative by fitting each asset’s OLS residual series (Table 3).
Those fitted series are orthogonal to the observed market by construction, but a new simulated
residual path need not have exactly zero sample covariance with its market path. Fitting JumpHMM to
residuals requires converting each residual series to a synthetic price path by cumulative compounding
and a second fit per asset. The corrected full-return construction instead reuses the generator’s centered
shape and supplies the residual variance budget without that second fit. It preserves the composed
path mean exactly, while variance and factor recovery depend on the stated variance convention and
cross-covariance assumptions. At zero market loading it preserves the generator path’s centered
empirical distribution. For positive market loading, Eq. (S44) describes how the independent market
contribution changes population excess kurtosis on the unclipped non-tracker branch. The clipped
and R2 -preserving branches use the different variance allocations in Algorithm 2.

Table S11: Simulation check of the kurtosis composition rule. For each variance share ρi ,
200
√ pairs√of independent in-sample-length generator paths were standardized and combined as
  ρi x + 1 − ρi y. The predicted column evaluates Eq. (S44) with each pair’s sample excess
kurtosis; the simulated column is the sample excess kurtosis of the combined series. Both are
averaged over the 200 pairs.
                                    ρi    Predicted κ    Simulated κ
                                   0.1       6.09           6.11
                                   0.3       4.31           4.34
                                   0.5       3.71           3.74



S10     Uncertainty in the multi-asset jump comparison
The jump comparison used four seeds and 1,000 market replications per window, with all fits
frozen (Table 6). Within each setting, naive and corrected composition shared the same asset and
market draws. The no-jump and market-only settings reused the no-jump asset draws; the market-
only and market-plus-asset settings reused the jump-enabled market draws. Enabled and disabled
models used separate random-number streams, so matching replication identifiers did not imply
identical innovations. Primary summaries included every path; jump-active subsets only described
the mechanism. For each metric, we averaged across tickers within each replication and formed the
difference between settings (Table S12). The √ Monte Carlo standard error was the sample standard
deviation of the 1,000 differences divided by 1,000, and intervals used the mean difference plus
or minus 1.96 standard errors (Table S12). Keeping the cross-section together retained dependence
from the shared market draw. The intervals did not treat assets as independent market histories or
include uncertainty from fitting or historical-window selection. Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) non-
rejection remained descriptive because returns were temporally dependent. The temporal contrast
between training and holdout remained clear in the replication-level uncertainty estimates (Table S12).
The episode frequencies matched the rare-event setting (Table S13): 247 of 1,000 training-length


                                                    44
SPY paths and 22 of 1,000 holdout-length paths contained an episode. The corresponding shares
across enabled asset generators were 24.24% and 2.46%. Market-only jumps reduced average 25-lag
autocorrelation error for 99.5% of training assets but only 2.6% of holdout assets. Enabling jumps
in both components reduced that error for 96.9% and 0.5%, respectively. These fractions described
ticker-level mean changes, not significance tests. The temporal contrast therefore extended across
most assets, within the limits of the short holdout and transferred SPY calibration.

Table S12: Monte Carlo uncertainty in the effect of jump settings under corrected composition.
Differences are relative to jumps disabled, with 1,000 market replications per window. ∆ACF25 is the
change in mean absolute error of the absolute-return autocorrelation function through lag 25; negative
values indicate improved temporal fit. ∆KS is the change in Kolmogorov–Smirnov non-rejection rate
in percentage points. Brackets contain approximate 95% Monte Carlo (MC) intervals conditional on
the fitted models and observed histories.
                 Jump setting                  ∆ACF25 [95% MC interval]                  ∆KS [95% MC interval]
                 Training: 2014–2024, 423 assets, 2,766 days
                 Market only     −0.00725 [−0.00812, −0.00638]     −0.30 [−1.08, 0.49]
                 Market + assets −0.01988 [−0.02063, −0.01913] −12.25 [−13.02, −11.49]
                 Holdout: 2025, 416 assets, 249 days
                 Market only           0.00195 [0.00104, 0.00287]                           −0.04 [−0.41, 0.34]
                 Market + assets       0.00502 [0.00412, 0.00593]                          −1.49 [−1.87, −1.12]




Table S13: Episode incidence and breadth of the temporal change in the multi-asset jump
comparison. SPY paths with an episode are counted over the 1,000 jump-enabled market replications
per window. Asset paths with an episode is the mean jump-active share across the enabled asset
generators. The last two columns give the share of assets whose mean absolute-return autocorrelation
error through lag 25 fell under corrected composition when jumps were enabled in the market only,
or in the market and the assets, relative to jumps disabled.
Window SPY paths with an episode Asset paths with an episode (%) Assets with lower ACF25 error, market only (%) . . . , market + assets (%)
Training               247 of 1,000                          24.24                                            99.5                    96.9
Holdout                 22 of 1,000                           2.46                                             2.6                     0.5




                                                                     45
S11    Residual-centering control
To separate the variance correction from the different residual mean constraints, we paired each
native training path with an equivalently centered version (Table S14). The experiment reused the
frozen full-return and residual models, ordinary least squares (OLS) calibrations, observed training
SPY, seed 1234, and 100 draws per asset of length 2,766. The Gaussian single-index model (SIM),
JumpHMM-on-residuals, stationary block bootstrap, and generalized autoregressive conditional
heteroskedasticity (GARCH) model retained their native variance scales. With gi denoting a native
composed draw, the control removed only its residual mean:
                                                  T
                                               1 X
                       gictrl (t) = gi (t) −         gi (u) − αi − βieff gm (u) .
                                                                               
                                                                                                       (S45)
                                               T u=1

The effective loading equaled the fitted loading except when the hybrid rule changed it. Naive and
hybrid paths already satisfied the constraint and were reused without modification. No fits, random
draws, loadings, or scales changed between a native path and its control. This paired translation left
sample variance, recovered loading, R2 , and excess kurtosis unchanged to numerical tolerance for
every evaluated path. The control assessed mean treatment; it did not restore cumulative residual
uncertainty or estimate parameter uncertainty.
For a comparison on the same assets, the six-method summaries used the 393 assets whose GARCH
fits passed the acceptance checks (Table S14). Refitting all 423 residual series with explicit con-
vergence and admissibility checks reproduced the accepted models’ coefficients exactly. All opti-
mizations converged; the same 30 fits were excluded because their ARCH and GARCH coefficients
summed to at least one. Acceptance records, coefficient fingerprints, and exclusion reasons accom-
pany the fitted-model cache. The control therefore retained the same models and eligible asset set.
There were 39,300 paired paths per method on the common set. The accompanying results also
retain each method’s full available population: 423 assets for the other five methods and 393 for
GARCH. All available-path summaries reproduced the corresponding native values in Table 3 at its
reported precision for the metrics included here. Pass rates pooled the same number of draws per
asset; Wasserstein distances and intercept errors were medians across paths. Pass rates remained
descriptive under serial dependence and the fixed-sum constraint. Equivalent centering favored the
residual-fit comparators while preserving the improvement from naive to hybrid composition, so the
control narrowed the interpretation of the cross-method comparison without changing the variance
correction.

Table S14: Paired control for residual centering on common training assets. Native and centered
results use the same 393 assets and 100 paths per asset. Centered paths have zero residual mean
over 2,766 observations. Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) and Anderson–Darling (AD) columns give
non-rejection percentages at α = 0.05; higher values indicate closer empirical fit. W1 is median
Wasserstein-1 distance, and |α̂ − α| is median absolute ordinary least squares (OLS) intercept error,
both in yr−1 ; lower values indicate closer agreement. Naive and hybrid already center each residual
path. JumpHMM denotes the hidden Markov generator, with jumps disabled; SIM denotes the
single-index model, and GARCH denotes generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity.
                               KS pass (%)         AD pass (%)              W1              |α̂ − α|
    Method                  Native Centered Native Centered Native Centered Native Centered
    Naive                      7.5         7.5      3.7       3.7   0.695        0.695   0.002     0.002
    Gaussian SIM               0.6         0.9      0.5       0.6   0.675        0.673   0.047     0.002
    Hybrid                    74.4        74.4     65.1      65.1   0.246        0.246   0.002     0.002
    JumpHMM-on-residuals      75.8        78.4     70.4      71.4   0.230        0.226   0.048     0.002
    Block bootstrap           73.5        76.7     66.7      68.0   0.230        0.227   0.041     0.002
    GARCH(1,1)-t              67.4        70.0     61.4      63.0   0.267        0.262   0.047     0.002




                                                     46
